Astronomy is not just about the stars. Astronomy is about the constellations, the nine planets, the sun and the moons. The solar system is very complex and has many extraordinary objects.



There are four different types of stars: Protostars, Bright Stars, Red Giants, and White Dwarfs. Protostars are stars that are on the verge of being born. They are glowing clouds of dust and gas. Gravity pulls on every atom moving them towards the center of the cloud of dust, which causes the Protostar to collapse. Over a period of twenty million years the star begins to form and 10 million years after the pocket of gas was formed, a star is born.



The second types of stars are called Bright Stars. They are formed when the new star has completed about 35 million years of its life cycle. A star’s life cycle is a lot like a human’s life cycle, except a star’s years are in millions. When a star is about 10 million years old it is in the same stage on average as a regular human that is about twenty years old. The birth and death rate of stars is called Stellar Evolution. A Bright Star is made when nuclear fusion doubles the size of the star.



The third types of stars are called Red Giants. They are made because the outward flow of the star’s core energy stops. Gravity then steps in and squeezes the star to make it decrease in size. The core of the star’s heat increases and it starts releasing small amounts of energy, the energy holds a large amount of hydrogen gas. The star then begins to grow larger, but it does not get brighter. As a result of the sudden and fast temperature drop, the star’s color changes from blue-white to a red color. Most Red Giant stars have been found in groups called Globular Clusters. Globular Clusters are groups of up to one million stars that move through space.



The fourth type of stars are called White Dwarfs. When a White Dwarf is made the star begins cooling off. As a result of cooling, the outer gas layer spreads out. The star’s temperature drops and makes the gas layer spread out even more. Eventually, the outer layer spreads out so far that the gas layer separates from the star. Then, a Planetary Nebula (cloud of glowing atoms), moves in all directions. The star’s core isn’t giving out any more energy and is to the point of collapsing slowly. All of the matter that the star had in the beginning is still there, but it ...



... middle of paper ...



...on. Orion was an ancient Greek hunter and warrior. The constellation Orion shows him caring a club shield, and a sword dangling from his belt. Orion has more Bright Stars the any other constellations. The two brightest stars in it are Betelgeuse and Rigel. Betelgeuse is Orion’s shoulder and Rigel is his foot. Cassiopeia is another well-known constellation. "Cassiopeia is a group of stars, the brightest which form a large W in the northern sky." (Miller, 10). Cassiopeia is found next to the Big Dipper and Orion. Its shape is an exact M or W, formed with the five bright stars. "The mythic Cassiopeia was an Ethiopian Queen." (Miller 10). Constellations are probably the most interesting thing in the solar system. Most people look at them as an exciting look at the mythological part of our solar system, and others think that they are just another interesting part of the night sky.
Science has provided the technologically advanced and
comfortable existence that the majority of Europeans enjoy today compared with that of previous generations. At
least as importantly, it lets us predict future events with
increasing accuracy (for example, the weather) and to
understand our place in the Universe in time and space.
Astronomy is the oldest science and arguably the one
with the greatest long-term impact on civilisation. For
example, the revolution in scientific thought that occurred at the end of the Middle Ages was driven by the
revelation that the Earth goes around the Sun. This was
followed by the realisation, via observations of a comet
and two supernovae at the end of the 16th and beginning of the 17th centuries, that the western orthodoxy
that everything above the Moon was unchanging, with
the planets fixed to crystal spheres, was totally wrong.
Furthermore, it was realised that planetary motion could
be understood in terms of physical laws that could also
be applied to objects on the Earth. The greatest technology-led breakthrough came in 1609, when Galileo
Galilei first pointed a telescope at the night sky and recorded in detail the wonders it revealed.
Europe was home to this scientific revolution, and since
then our continent has maintained a strong astronomical community working across a diverse range of fields.
Today they study everything from the interaction of the
solar wind with the Earth’s upper atmosphere to cosmology. We are now living in exciting times for our science and are on the brink of truly fundamental breakthroughs in understanding. In turn, Europe is becoming
an increasingly dominant player in this field. With appropriate resources targeted in a coordinated pan-European
way, it can be the world leader in many of the most important areas of astronomy.
The dramatic progress of astronomical discoveries over
recent decades is intimately connected to advances
in technology. Ever since that fateful day in 1609, telescopes have increased steadily in power. In the middle
of the last century, our ability to detect radio signals from
space provided the first new window on the Universe,
while our ability to launch satellites provided observing
facilities that now cover the entire electromagnetic spectrum and gave us the ability to visit other worlds. The
challenging requirements of sensitivity and precision for
astronomical measurements have in turn often driven