Telescope System Instrumentation Program. Universities and independent
observatories operate the majority of the large optical and infrared.
telescopes in the United States. The top priority for moderate projects for
the new decade is TSIP, an NSF program that will maximize the scientific
effectiveness of these telescopes by instrumenting them and by making
them accessible to the entire astronomical community. It will have a
multiplier effect by encouraging the continuation of substantial
nonfederal investments, while at the same time helping to bring the
national and private observatories together as a coherent research
system. Under this initiative, the NSF would fund the construction of
peer-reviewed new instrumentation at private observatories in exchange
for telescope time or other equally valuable benefits for the community at
large. The value of the observing time (determined from the cost of
operations and the amortized investment) should be 50 percent of the
granted funds.
Gamma-ray Large Area Space Telescope. GLAST, the second priority for
moderate projects, is a powerful gamma-ray telescope with a sensitivity
30 times greater than that of its predecessor, the Energetic Gamma Ray
Experiment (EGRET) instrument on the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. GLAST will study powerful jets from the supermassive black holes
in the centers of distant galaxies, the acceleration mechanisms of cosmic
rays, and the origin of tremendous bursts of gamma-ray radiation from
the distant universe. GLAST has the potential for breakthrough discoveries, such as by observing gamma rays from dark matter annihilation. It
will detect gamma rays in the photon energy range between 10 MeV and
300 GeV with unprecedented positional accuracy. The committee
applauds the crucial technical contributions of DOE to this important
NASA mission.
Laser Interferometer Space Antenna. LISA is unique among the recommended new initiatives in that it is designed to detect the gravitational
radiation predicted by Einstein’s theory of general relativity. The direct
measurement of gravitational radiation from astrophysical sources will
open a new window onto the universe and enable investigations of the
physics of strong gravitational fields. LISA consists of three spacecraft
spaced 5 million km apart in an equilateral triangle, with lasers accurately
monitoring their separation. It will be sensitive to gravitational-wave
frequencies between 10–1 to 10–4 Hz, frequencies too low to be detected
by the ground-based LIGO. For the first time, it will be possible to
observe evidence of the coalescence of supermassive black holes as
distant galaxies merge, and the gravitational radiation from white dwarf
binaries in our own galaxy. It is assumed that LISA will be a joint mission
between NASA and ESA, with costs shared approximately equally.
Advanced Solar Telescope. AST will observe solar plasma processes and
magnetic fields with unprecedented resolution in space and time. It will
provide critical information needed to solve the mysteries associated with
the generation, structure, and dynamics of the surface magnetic fields,
which govern the solar wind, solar flares, and short-term solar variability.
AST is a ground-based, 4-m-class, adaptive-optics-equipped facility that
will operate in the wavelength band from 0.3 to 35 µm. It is proposed as
a joint project with international partners, in which the United States
would provide about half the costs.
Square Kilometer Array Technology Development. The SKA is an international ground-based centimeter-wave radio telescope array with
106
 square meters of collecting area that will enable study of the first
structures and the first luminous objects to form during the dawn of the
modern universe, and will provide unprecedented images of protostellar
disks and the neutral jets launched by young stars. SKA’s sensitivity will
be a factor of 100 greater than that of existing centimeter-wave facilities.
The increase in sensitivity has great discovery potential, and SKA will
revolutionize the study of objects and phenomena that are currently
undetectable at centimeter wavelengths. The U.S. SKA development
program will, in collaboration with the international radio astronomy
community, aggressively pursue technology and technique development
in this decade that will enable the construction of the SKA in the following decade.
Solar Dynamics Observatory. SDO will probe the outer layers of the Sun
to determine the connections between the interior dynamics and the
activity of the solar corona, the origin of sunspots and solar active regions, and the origin of coronal mass ejections and solar flares. SDO is a
space-based mission that will carry a number of instruments and small
telescopes to monitor the Sun continuously at ultraviolet and optical
wavelengths (0.02 to 1 µm).
Combined Array for Research in Millimeter-wave Astronomy. CARMA is
the planned combination of the Berkeley-Illinois-Maryland Association
(BIMA) and the Owens Valley Radio Observatory (OVRO) millimeterwave arrays at a superior site along with the addition of new, smaller
antennas. The resulting hybrid array will have unique imaging qualities,
sensitive to both small and large scales. It will study star formation at all
epochs, and it will measure the small distortions in the cosmic (Big Bang)
microwave background caused by the hot gas in distant clusters of
galaxies along the line of sight. Its Northern Hemisphere location will
provide sky coverage complementary to ALMA. Of the construction
costs, 60 percent will come from nonfederal sources.
Energetic X-ray Imaging Survey Telescope. EXIST will survey the entire sky
every 90 minutes to search for weak and often time-variable astronomical sources of 5- to 600-keV x-ray photons. Such x rays emanate from
many sources, including supermassive black holes in the centers of
galaxies, stellar mass black holes, neutron stars, and embedded supernovae in our galaxy, and the mysterious distant sources of gamma-ray bursts
of radiation. Attached to the International Space Station, EXIST will
survey sources 1,000 times weaker than the sources in the previous hard
x-ray survey by the High Energy Astronomical Observatory (HEAO-1).
EXIST’s repeated surveys of the entire sky in the hard x-ray region will
complement those by LSST at optical wavelengths.
Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System. VERITAS will
perform the first sensitive sky survey for astronomical sources of extremely energetic photons—those with energies from 100 to 10,000 GeV.
VERITAS will complement GLAST and EXIST in studying the cosmic
sources of relativistic particles such as supermassive black holes, gammaray burst sources, pulsars, and supernova remnants. Making use of the
established technology of the 10-m reflector at the Whipple Observatory,
VERITAS consists of an array of seven 10-m-diameter reflectors that will
achieve more than an order-of-magnitude improvement in sensitivity and
have a far greater ability than existing instruments to locate sources.
Advanced Radio Interferometry between Space and Earth. ARISE is a
sensitive, Earth-orbiting radio antenna with a diameter of about 25 m
that will improve the angular resolution of the ground-based Very Long
Baseline Array by a factor 6. It will probe the regions near supermassive
black holes, which are thought to produce relativistic jets, and will enable
the study of maser sources, both in the Milky Way and in the nuclei of
other galaxies.
Frequency Agile Solar Radio Telescope. Radio waves from the Sun bring
information about the heating of the corona, the nature and evolution of
coronal magnetic fields, the structure of the solar atmosphere, and the
origin of the solar wind. FASR will analyze this radiation over a frequency range from 0.3 to 30 GHz, and it will improve on existing facilities
by operating at hundreds of frequencies and providing a factor-of-10
better spatial resolution.
South Pole Submillimeter-wave Telescope. The SPST will take advantage
of the superb atmospheric transmission conditions between wavelengths
of 200 µm and 1 mm at the South Pole to survey the dusty universe, study
small variations in the background radiation emanating from the early
pregalactic universe, and identify primordial galaxies.
Other Projects
Two areas in which the committee considered it premature to set
priorities are cosmic microwave background experiments and particle
astrophysics. In both disciplines, projects are often experiments rather
than observatories. As a result, it is difficult to plan far in advance, since
the best strategy may depend critically on the outcome of ongoing
experiments.
Observations of the cosmic microwave background can determine
the large-scale properties of the universe and reveal the tiny fluctuations
that were the seeds of all the structure we see today. These observations
are of fundamental importance to both astronomy and physics. Together
with ground-based and balloon experiments, NASA’s MAP mission, to be
launched in spring 2001, will revolutionize knowledge of the microwave
background, and the committee believes that no decision on the next
major or moderate microwave background project should be made until
the results from that mission are available. ESA’s Planck mission later in
the decade will also provide important information, but it will be possible
to decide on the next step before its results are available. Together, MAP
and Planck will test the most promising ideas about the very early universe as well as determine cosmological parameters to high precision.
The next frontier is to measure the polarization of the cosmic microwave
background, which has the potential of probing even earlier times, close
to the Big Bang itself.
Particle astrophysicists view the universe through different eyes than
do most astronomers: Instead of photons, they observe energetic particles, and they search for exotic new particles that could account for the
dark matter. The committee decided that it was too early to prioritize the
Northern Hemisphere Auger project or Telescope Array for ultrahighenergy cosmic rays and the Ice Cube experiment for high-energy neutrinos. In each case, ongoing experiments—the Southern Hemisphere
Pierre Auger Observatory project and the Antarctic Muon and Neutrino
Detector Array (AMANDA) experiment at the South Pole—will provide
critical information that will enable an informed decision to be made
soon. The decision on how to pursue future searches for dark matter will
be guided by the outcome of experiments now just starting.
Small Initiatives
National Virtual Observatory. The NVO is the committee’s top-priority
small initiative. NVO involves the integration of all major astronomical
data archives into a digital database stored on a network of computers,
the provision of advanced data exploration services for the astronomical
community, and the development of data standards and tools for data
mining. It will create a powerful resource for public education and
outreach by making near-real-time observations accessible over the
Internet. NVO will enable professional astronomers, educators, and the
public to take full advantage of the wealth of data from existing and
planned surveys such as LSST. NVO is made possible by huge advances
in the past decade in computer speed, widespread access to high-speed
networks, a dramatic decrease in the cost of computing and data storage
capabilities, and an ongoing revolution in techniques to extract science
from a large data set. The committee recommends coordinated support
from both NASA and the NSF, since NVO will serve both the space- and
ground-based science communities.
Additional Small Intiatives. The remaining recommendations for small
initiatives are listed alphabetically and are not prioritized, but they
represent a number of exciting opportunities for making a relatively small
investment to potentially achieve a major gain in capability and scientific
return. Several of these opportunities span both space- and groundbased astronomy, like NVO. To facilitate the interpretation of the
tremendous harvest of data throughout the decade, the committee
recommends (1) augmentation of NASA’s Astrophysics Theory Program
and (2) initiation of a NASA- and NSF-funded National Astrophysical
Theory Postdoctoral Program that would award 10 portable 3-year
postdoctoral positions each year. In view of the tremendous increase in
the volume and complexity of the spectroscopic data to be gathered
across the electromagnetic spectrum by new facilities over the course of
the decade, the committee recommends the establishment of a Laboratory Astrophysics Program funded by both NASA and the NSF. The
Ultralong-Duration Balloon (ULDB) program offers the prospect of
carrying payloads that weigh several tons to roughly 40-km altitudes for
flights that last several months. For certain types of experiments, this
program offers an alternative to small space experiments at a fraction of
their cost. The committee recommends an augmentation of the ULDB
program for the development of a steering capability that would increase
both the duration and the probability of success of the balloon flights.
The Advanced Cosmic-ray Composition Experiment for the Space Station
(ACCESS) will measure the spectrum and composition of cosmic rays
with energies up to 1,000 TeV. This experiment will provide unique data
for studying the origin of cosmic rays and the mechanism by which they
are accelerated. The Low Frequency Array (LOFAR), a joint project
now under way between the Netherlands Foundation for Research in
Astronomy and the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, provides a 100- to
1,000-fold improvement in sensitivity and resolution over existing radio
telescopes in the wavelength range from 2 to 20 m. It has the potential
to discover the hydrogen clouds out of which the first galaxies formed.
The committee recommends that the NSF contribute to LOFAR so that it
will be available to the entire astronomical community. Expansion of the
Synoptic Optical Long-term Investigation of the Sun (SOLIS) from one
station to a three-station network would permit continuous, 24-hour
monitoring of magnetic fields on the solar surface. An expanded SOLIS
promises crucial data for understanding the magnetic origin of solar
variability and a far greater capability to forecast the space weather that
so adversely affects space satellites.
technology
Technological innovation has often enabled astronomical discovery.
Most of the major discoveries listed at the beginning of this chapter were
possible only because of the remarkable advances in technology in the
past two decades. 
