Within every living organism, countless reactions occur every second. These reactions typically occur more rapidly and with greater efficiency than would be possible under the same conditions in the chemical laboratory, and while using only the subset of elements that are readily available in nature. Despite these apparent differences between life and the laboratory, biological reactions are governed by the same rules as any other chemical reaction. Thus, a firm understanding of the fundamentals of chemistry is invaluable in biochemistry. There are entire textbooks devoted to the application of chemical principles in biological systems and so it is not possible to cover all of the relevant topics in depth in this short article. The aim is instead to provide a brief overview of those areas in chemistry that are most relevant to biochemistry. We summarize the basic principles, give examples of how these principles are applied in biological systems and suggest further reading on individual topics.
Biochemical systems carry out an enormous variety of chemical reactions with great efficiency. These reactions can be catabolic, breaking down larger molecules to release energy and to generate precursors for further reactions, and/or anabolic, combining molecules together to generate biologically useful molecules. When a chemist carries out a reaction in the laboratory, they have numerous different techniques that can be applied to increase the yield or rate of a reaction; they can alter the temperature or pressure or perhaps add a catalyst. In contrast, biological systems have to carry out the reaction at the temperature maintained by the organism, and, with the exception of organisms living deep in the ocean, at atmospheric pressure. In biological systems, enzymes are employed to increase the rate of reaction; enzymes are proteins whose substrate-binding site acts to lower the energy of high energy species along the reaction pathway from starting material to product. They can achieve enormous enhancement in the rate of reaction compared with the uncatalysed reaction. The classic example is the enzyme triose phosphate isomerase which interconverts dihydroxyacetone phosphate and d-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate during the breakdown of glucose. This reaction occurs 109 times faster in the presence of the enzyme than when uncatalysed [1].

These rate enhancements are particularly remarkable when we consider that less than a third of the naturally occurring elements are used by biological systems. In order to be exploited in a biological system, elements must be sufficiently abundant in a form that can be taken up by living things. Thus, many catalytic species that are in common use in the laboratory are simply not available for biochemical reactions, for example palladium, used in the addition of hydrogen across a double bond. Of the elements in the periodic table, 28 are essential for animal life (Figure 1); the most recent element found to be essential is bromine, which was found to be required for the proper formation of networks by the protein collagen IV in 2014 [2]. Of the 28 essential elements, 11 make up 99.9% of the atoms in the human body. The other 17 are known as trace elements and are present in very small amounts, ranging from a milligram to gram quantities in an adult human.
Periodic table illustrating the elements essential for life
The 28 elements essential for animal life are indicated by coloured squares; trace elements are shown in yellow and those present in larger quantities are shown in green. The six most abundant elements in the human body are carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus and calcium, accounting for almost 99% of the mass of an adult human. Carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen are the building blocks of organic biomolecules, calcium is present in large amounts in bones and teeth (in addition to being vital for cell signalling in smaller amounts), phosphorus is likewise found in bones and teeth (smaller quantities are a vital part of DNA, adenoside triphosphate – the energy currency of the cell – and play an important role in cell signalling).
Atomic structure and bonding
Electrons in atoms are organized into a series of shells with successively higher energies (and greater distance from the nucleus). The shells are identified by the principal quantum number which takes integer values from one to seven for the elements of the current periodic table. The shell with principle quantum number 1 has the lowest energy with 2 being the next highest in energy, and so on. Within a shell there are subshells designated by the letters s, p, d and f, and within each subshell electrons occupy orbitals: regions of space that may be occupied by up to two electrons, and whose energy and shape can be described mathematically by an equation known as the wave function. It is important not to confuse orbitals with an orbit; electrons do not move around the nucleus along a fixed path as they would in an orbit. Instead the wave function allows us to calculate the probability of finding an electron at a particular position around the nucleus. Different subshells have different numbers of orbitals; s subshells have just one orbital and can therefore accommodate only two electrons, p subshells have three orbitals which can be filled by six electrons in total, and d subshells have five orbitals accommodating up to ten electrons. Shells are filled according to the Aufbau principle, i.e. filling the shell with the lowest principal quantum number first.

Arrangements of electrons or electron configurations, in which the outer shell (the occupied shell with highest principle quantum number) is full are more favourable than those in which it is partially filled. Of the elements in the periodic table, only the noble gases in group 18 have full outer shells. Bond formation, the movement of electrons between atoms, allows other elements to achieve this configuration. Chemical bonds can be covalent, where electrons are shared between atoms or ionic, where electrons are transferred from one atom to another resulting in one positively and one negatively charged species. Looking at the number of electrons in the outer or valence shell enables us to work out how many bonds an atom would need to form in order to fill its outer shell. It is important to note, however, that a bond will only actually form if the energy of the electrons in the bond is lower than the energy of those electrons in the isolated atoms.

As the majority of biological chemistry relates to covalently bonded molecules composed primarily of the elements carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and oxygen, it is particularly important to know how many bonds each of these elements form. Hydrogen, with its single valence electron requires one additional electron to achieve the noble gas configuration and therefore makes only one bond. H+ ions (often just called protons), in which the hydrogen atom has lost an electron, also play many roles in biological systems – for example the formation of ATP is driven by a concentration gradient of H+ ions across a membrane. Carbon, with four valence electrons, achieves a full outer shell by forming four covalent bonds, for example by sharing an electron with each of four other atoms. Nitrogen has five valence electrons and forms three covalent bonds leaving one pair of non-bonded electrons; a lone pair. The lone pair is important for the reactivity of nitrogen as it can be used to make a new bond with electron-poor species in chemical reactions. The lone pair can also be shared with an H+ ion leading to the formation of ammonium, i.e. the lone pair allows nitrogen to act as a base. Finally, oxygen with six electrons makes two covalent bonds and has two lone pairs of electrons. As with nitrogen, the presence of lone pairs on oxygen makes this atom reactive towards electron-poor species, including H+. Although we often refer to H+ ions as though they exist in that form, in water free H+ forms the hydronium ion H3O+ very rapidly.

When an ionic bond is formed, electrons are transferred completely from one atom to the other. The interaction in an ionic bond is entirely Coulombic in nature (i.e. only due to the force of attraction between positive and negative particles) and there is no directionality to the interaction. Such a bond occurs when the elements differ widely in their ability to attract electrons or more formally, when there is a very large energy difference between the valence orbitals (the outermost orbitals containing the electrons available to participate in bonding) in the two atoms. Covalent bonding involves sharing of electrons between atoms and occurs when the two atoms are more similar in their ability to attract electrons; i.e. when the valence orbitals have similar energy. Sharing of electrons in a covalent bond requires atomic orbitals on each of the atoms to interact with each other. One of the consequences of this is that, in contrast with ionic bonds, covalent bonds are directional: a new bond cannot form in a region of space where the orbitals that interact to form the new bond have no electron density. Two classes of covalent bonds occur commonly in biological chemistry, σ bonds and π bonds (Figure 2A,B). Although a pair of electrons are shared when a covalent bond is formed, however, this sharing is not necessarily equal. Atoms with a strong ability to attract electrons, i.e. low energy valence orbitals, are referred to as electronegative. If the two atoms forming a covalent bond differ in electronegativity then there will be greater electron density closer to the more electronegative atom. This results in a permanent dipole, with one atom partially negatively charged and the other partially positively charged