The description of covalent bonding has so far assumed that a covalent bond involves the sharing of one pair of electrons between two atoms, i.e. that the bond is localized. For the majority of biological molecules this description is adequate, however in some cases this description of bonding does not explain the observed properties of a molecule.

A well-known example is benzene. It was originally thought that benzene contained three alternating single and double bonds, however measurements showed that the bonds were all of equal length. We now consider the bonding in benzene not as three pairs of p-orbitals each interacting to make one double bond, but six p-orbitals each interacting with its neighbours to create a ring of electron density above and below the plane of the carbon atoms (Figure 3A). Compounds with delocalized rings of electrons are of major importance in biological systems. For example, the bases in DNA all contain delocalized rings as a part of their structures and favourable interactions between the electrons in these rings (referred to as π–π stacking) contribute to the stability of the DNA double helix 

Delocalization of electrons does not only occur in rings; another type of system where delocalization occurs is where three (or more) parallel p-orbitals are adjacent. Consider the carboxylate anion (discussed in The carbonyl functional group section) where a carbon atom makes a double bond with one oxygen atom and a single bond with a negatively charged oxygen atom. In this structure, we can visualize the negative charge on the oxygen being used to make a new double bond with the carbon atom and the existing double bond breaking to leave a negative charge on the oxygen atom (Figure 3C). Although we can visualize single and double bonds exchanging position within the molecule, this is not an accurate description of bonding in the molecule. In reality, the electron density is spread over three p-orbitals, and a higher electron density exists on the two oxygen atoms than on the central carbon atom. Delocalization of electron density across three p-orbitals is also important in explaining why the bond formed between two amino acids in a protein chain is planar (see Functional groups found in amino acids section). Molecules with electrons are delocalized over a larger number of adjacent parallel p-orbitals are also common in biology. These molecules are usually referred to as conjugated and can be identified by their alternating chain of single and double bonds. For example, retinal, the light-absorbing molecule that is bound to the protein opsin in the photoreceptor cells responsible for vision in mammals, has electron density delocalized across 12 p-orbitals (Figure 3D). The long delocalized system is essential for the absorption of light in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum.

Non-covalent interactions
Non-covalent interactions, such as the π–π stacking mentioned in the above section, arise due to electrostatic interactions between two different molecules or within the same molecule between atoms that are not bonded together, without the sharing of electrons via a covalent bond. These interactions are much weaker than the covalent bond but they occur very frequently and, as a result, can have a huge influence on the properties of a molecule. Many biomolecules are macromolecules with thousands of atoms and therefore make many hundreds of thousands of non-covalent interactions. Non-covalent interactions are particularly important in proteins. Proteins are polymers of amino acids, synthesized in a linear chain on the ribosome. Each protein chain folds into a specific 3D structure that is essential for its function; non-covalent interactions between the constituent amino acids determine the 3D structure. Non-covalent interactions are also important in DNA where they help to ensure that the sequence of DNA is preserved upon replication; in the lipid bilayer where non-covalent interactions between lipids create a barrier around the cell; and in molecular recognition (discussed in more detail in [3]). There are several classes of non-covalent interactions; here we discuss van der Waals interactions, hydrogen bonds and briefly, ionic interactions. We also discuss the ‘hydrophobic effect’ which is commonly invoked to explain why non-polar molecules do not disperse in water and why proteins fold.

van der Waals interactions
A dipole is an uneven distribution of electron density within a molecule such that one region of the molecule has a higher electron density than the other and the two regions are equally but oppositely charged. van der Waals interactions occur when a dipole on one molecule interacts with the dipole on another molecule. These dipoles can be permanent or instantaneous. Permanent dipoles occur due to the uneven charge distribution in a covalent bond between two elements that differ greatly in electronegativity. The partially positively charged (δ+) atom on one molecule can interact favourably with the partially negatively charged (δ–) atom on another. Interactions between instantaneous dipoles are called London dispersion forces. They are the weakest among the non-covalent interactions, but also the most prevalent. London dispersion forces occur because the electron density in an atom or molecule does not have an even distribution; at any one time the electron density may be higher in one region than the other. The electron density is redistributed with time, thus the regions of high electron density are different from one moment to the next. The uneven charge distribution is called instantaneous dipole. The distribution of the electron density in neighbouring molecules is influenced by the dipole of the first molecule; areas of relative high electron density on one molecule induce an area of low electron density on the neighbouring molecule and vice versa; thus neighbouring molecules form instantaneous dipoles that attract each other. Typically, each of these interactions has a strength of only ∼2 kJ mol−1 (compared with covalent bonds which typically have a strength of hundreds of kJ mol−1) and the magnitude of the interaction is strongly distance dependent, approaching zero at a separation of ∼8–10 Å. When molecules have large surface areas that can come into close contact, for example in biological macromolecules, these interactions can make a huge contribution to the total free energy.

Hydrogen bonding
Hydrogen bonds are a special case of dipole–dipole interaction, but are considered separately here as they are vital for the function of many biochemical systems. A covalent bond between hydrogen and an electronegative atom, such as oxygen, nitrogen or fluorine, is polar, with electron density in the vicinity of the hydrogen much lower than that around its bonding partner. The favourable interaction between the δ+ hydrogen of one X–H bond (where X is an electronegative element) and the δ– X atom of another is called as a hydrogen bond. Hydrogen bonds are stronger than van der Waals interactions, but weaker than covalent bonds, with a typical strength between 5 and 40 kJ mol−1. It is important to note that the strength of a hydrogen bond depends heavily on the geometry of the atoms involved; the bonds are strongest when the three atoms involved in the bond are collinear. Hydrogen bonds are responsible for the specificity of base pairing, A to T and C to G, in DNA strands. They also play a key role in formation of structural elements during protein folding.

Ionic interactions
Ionic interactions occur between species that have full, permanent charges, i.e. ions. These interactions are much stronger than hydrogen bonds and London dispersion forces, but are much less common in biological systems. Ionic interactions between oppositely charged amino acids play an important role in stabilizing protein structure, as demonstrated by changes in protein shape with pH. Proteins have evolved to form the correct 3D structure at the pH of the environment where they function. At pH values far above and below the physiological range the charges of some of the amino acids forming the protein are changed (see section on pH and pKa for details). This changes the ionic interactions within the protein, in many cases causing the protein to unfold. Ionic interactions are particularly important in stabilizing proteins found in thermophilic organisms – those that thrive at temperatures above 40°C. Ionic interactions also play a key role in the binding of charged molecules such as ATP to their macromolecular partners.

The ‘hydrophobic effect’
The ‘hydrophobic effect’ is not a separate class of non-covalent interaction, but it is discussed here as the factors that give rise to this effect are very important for structure formation by biological macromolecules and especially proteins. Many molecules or parts of molecules, are hydrophobic or ‘water-hating’ and tend to cluster together when placed in water; this behaviour is often referred to as the hydrophobic effect. The hydrophobic effect is thought to be primarily entropic (see Why do chemical reactions happen? section), arising due to changes in hydrogen bonding within water in the presence of a non-polar molecule. Water forms an extensive network of transient hydrogen bonds which are broken and formed as the water molecules move. If a non-polar species is placed in water, it disrupts the hydrogen bonding networks. To minimize the number of hydrogen bonds lost due to this disruption water forms an ordered shell around the non-polar species. To make a large number of these ordered shells is entropically very unfavourable; clustering non-polar molecules together minimizes the non-polar surface area exposed to water and hence also minimizes the number of ordered water molecules (Figure 4). This is believed to be the primary driving force for burying non-polar groups on the inside of globular proteins and arranging polar groups on the outside. It is also the driving force for the self-assembly of lipid bilayers 
Functional groups in biochemistry
The chemical reactivity of an organic compound depends upon the way in which its atoms are bonded together. Certain collections of atoms having the same connectivity occur frequently in organic compounds and these collections are called functional groups. Functional groups have a characteristic chemical behaviour, and it is possible to predict some of the properties of a molecule based on which functional groups are present. When discussing organic compounds we will use the skeletal representation;