The natural environment consists of two major components: living and non-living things. The living components, as the name implies, include all lifeforms on earth, from microscopic microbes to gargantuan blue whales. Non-living components of the environment include all the spheres of the earth, (such as hydrosphere and lithosphere), physical, chemical, and other natural forces.

The interaction between these components is crucial for life. However, anthropological activities have affected the dynamics, resulting in an imbalance. For instance, the greenhouse effect is a natural phenomenon that has been around for millions of years. It is also a crucial process necessary for sustaining life on earth. However, since the Industrial Revolution, the levels of air pollution skyrocketed, pumping tremendous amounts of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.


 
This magnified the greenhouse effect, eventually leading to global warming. And the consequences have been dire, for instance, the rising sea level is expected to submerge most cities near the coast by 2050. Torrential floods and storms will increase in their intensity. Draughts will be more severe and induce constant famine. Hence, anthropological activities must be kept under check because environmental pollution can take atoll on the planet and ourselves.
There are various kinds of pollution in the environment, all arising from anthropological activities. These include air, water, soil, noise, and light pollution. Radioactive pollution is another type of pollution which is incredibly rare, but more dangerous than almost all other types of pollution.

Radioactive pollution occurs when the environment and the organisms living within are exposed to high energy ionizing radiation. These ionizing radiations carry tremendous amounts of energy, which can damage the DNA of living tissues. Once the DNA gets damaged, the living tissue is unable to repair itself and is more prone to mutations – which can cause uncontrolled cell growth – cancer.


 
As stated before, radiation pollution is quite rare. The last major incident was at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in 2011. A tsunami and an earthquake of magnitude 9.0 Mw damaged the powerplant, leading to a core meltdown.  This disaster was a Level 7 on the International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale (INES). This means the severity was on par with the Chernobyl Nuclear Accident which occurred decades before.

Apart from the extensive damage to the infrastructure, health issues were starting to arise. In 2012, screening tests were done on the children of Fukushima Prefecture. Around 36% of the children exhibited abnormal growths in their thyroid gland. By 2013, the number of people diagnosed with thyroid cancer and other forms of cancer had risen drastically.

In conclusion, such incidents can be prevented if proper care and safety measures were implemented. A seawall of adequate high could have prevented the tsunami. The Onagawa Nuclear Power Plant, which was closer to the epicenter of the earthquake, successfully withstood the tsunami and averted the disaster, which affected the Fukushima power plant.