It is very important to understand that the environment is climate, cleanliness, pollution and the total sum of the tree. Which is directly related to our daily life and affects it. As a result of scientific progress, the number of mills, factories, and vehicles has increased so much that nowadays environmental problems have arisen.

Humans and the environment are dependent on each other. If there is a slight change in our climate, then its direct effect starts appearing on our body. If the cold is more then we get cold but if the heat is more then we are unable to bear it.

The environment is the natural environment that helps to grow, nourish and destroy the earth. The natural environment plays a great role in the existence of life on Earth and it helps in developing humans, animals, and other living things. Human beings are affecting their environment with some of their bad habits and activities.
Environment refers to the environment around us and the elements contained in it and the living beings in it. We include air, land, water, animals, birds, plants, etc. all around us in our environment. The way we are affected by our environment, the way our environment is affected by the acts we do.

The trees cut down for the wood are ending the forest and the end of the forests is affecting the lives of the creatures living in the forest. Many species of animals have become extinct and many species are on the verge of extinction. Today, it is very common for lions or cheetahs to enter the village and harm the people living there.
But why is this happening? This is happening because we have taken away their house from these creatures and now these beings are forced to move towards villages and cities and are harming humans for their living. Environment means not only the environment around us but also our social and behavioral environment. All the elements which affect human, are included in the environment, social, cultural, economical, biological and physical.
There are many reasons for environmental pollution which affects our environment very much. Residues from man-made factories pollute our environment. But it is also not possible that in this race of development, we should ignore our development to protect our environment.

We can save our environment from contamination by keeping a few things in mind. The chimneys of the factories are low, due to which the smoke emanating from them spreads to the atmosphere around us. In today’s time, the house does not have as many members as there are more vehicles. The young child of the house also likes to drive at the place of the bicycle.
Smoke and toxic gases coming out of mills, factories, and commercial areas have created environmental problems. There are so much smoke and toxic gas coming out of buses, taxes, trucks, pumps, due to which the problem of pollution is becoming more serious.
Sewer dirt gets mixed up in the water of the flowing rivers in such a way that the drinking water of humans and animals becomes dirty as a result of which both become victims of weakness, disease, and serious diseases. Residents of slums in big cities have made this problem very seriously.
There are many reasons for environmental pollution which affects our environment very much. Residues from man-made factories pollute our environment. But it is also not possible that in this race of development, we should ignore our development to protect our environment.

Smoke and toxic gases must be expelled directly into the sky through these plants. There should be proper arrangement for maintenance of buses, cars, trucks, scooters in big cities and regular checking of them should also be done. Green plants should be planted and big trees should be protected.

Noisy noises should be limited and controlled for peaceful living. All men, women, and children should give their full support to protect the environment. There should be a provision of strict laws for the disposal of toxic and hazardous wastes. Public awareness should be made for the best use of resources.
There should be less use of chemical pesticides in agriculture. Forest management should increase forest areas. Before starting the development plans, their impact on the environment should be assessed. The man should try to reduce this problem with his efforts.

Factories that have been established cannot be set up at other places, but now the government should take care that any new factories that are open should be away from the city. The pollution caused by factories should not affect the people of the city. The man should try to reduce the pollution caused by himself.

Vehicles should be used as little as possible. This problem can also be reduced by using public transport. Efforts should be made by our scientists to control the smoke. Felling of forests should be severely punished and new trees should be planted.
World Environment Day is celebrated between 5 June to 16 June. On the day of the world environment, trees are planted everywhere and many works related to the environment are done in which June 5 has special significance. In today’s time, a man should strive to keep the environment balanced at his level.
Some state governments have also passed several laws to protect the environment. A Ministry is working for the protection of the environment under the Central Government. For the solution of this problem, public support can prove to be very helpful and useful. Lack of development and development processes also pose challenges. The search for a more viable future may only be meaningful in the context of a very vigorous attempt to eliminate the development of means of elimination.
We truly cannot understand the real worth of the environment. But we can estimate some of its importance that can help us understand its importance. It plays a vital role in keeping living things healthy in the environment.

Likewise, it maintains the ecological balance that will keep check of life on earth. It provides food, shelter, air, and fulfills all the human needs whether big or small.

Moreover, the entire life support of humans depends wholly on the environmental factors. In addition, it also helps in maintaining various life cycles on earth.

Most importantly, our environment is the source of natural beauty and is necessary for maintaining physical and mental health.
The environment gives us countless benefits that we can’t repay our entire life. As they are connected with the forest, trees, animals, water, and air. The forest and trees filter the air and absorb harmful gases. Plants purify water, reduce the chances of flood maintain natural balance and many others.

Moreover, the environment keeps a close check on the environment and its functioning, It regulates the vital systems that are essential for the ecosystem. Besides, it maintains the culture and quality of life on earth.

The environment regulates various natural cycles that happen daily. These cycles help in maintaining the natural balance between living things and the environment. Disturbance of these things can ultimately affect the life cycle of humans and other living beings.

The environment has helped us and other living beings to flourish and grow from thousands of years. The environment provides us fertile land, water, air, livestock and many essential things for survival.
Human activities are the major cause of environmental degradation because most of the activities humans do harm the environment in some way. The activities of humans that causes environmental degradation is pollution, defective environmental policies, chemicals, greenhouse gases, global warming, ozone depletion, etc.

All these affect the environment badly. Besides, these the overuse of natural resources will create a situation in the future there will be no resources for consumption. And the most basic necessity of living air will get so polluted that humans have to use bottled oxygen for breathing.

It is not a matter of any one group trying to be free from environmental pollution. No rule or law can be overcome by applying this problem. If every person thinks about its side effects and the next generation, then perhaps this problem can be overcome.
Above all, increasing human activity is exerting more pressure on the surface of the earth which is causing many disasters in an unnatural form. Also, we are using the natural resources at a pace that within a few years they will vanish from the earth.
To conclude, we can say that it is the environment that is keeping us alive. Without the blanket of environment, we won’t be able to survive.

Moreover, the environment’s contribution to life cannot be repaid. Besides, still what the environment has done for us, in return we only have damaged and degraded it.
The ecosystem that includes all the plants, animals, birds, reptiles, insects, water bodies, fishes, human beings, trees, microorganisms and many more are part of the environment. Besides, all these constitute the environment.
The three types of environment includes the physical, social, and cultural environment. Besides, various scientists have defined different types and numbers of environment.
Source of Environment Issue
There are hundreds of issue that causing damage to the environment. But in this, we are going to discuss the main causes of environmental issues because they are very dangerous to life and the ecosystem.

Pollution – It is one of the main causes of an environmental issue because it poisons the air, water, soil, and noise. As we know that in the past few decades the numbers of industries have rapidly increased. Moreover, these industries discharge their untreated waste into the water bodies, on soil, and in air. Most of these wastes contain harmful and poisonous materials that spread very easily because of the movement of water bodies and wind.

Greenhouse Gases – These are the gases which are responsible for the increase in the temperature of the earth surface. This gases directly relates to air pollution because of the pollution produced by the vehicle and factories which contains a toxic chemical that harms the life and environment of earth.

Climate Changes – Due to environmental issue the climate is changing rapidly and things like smog, acid rains are getting common. Also, the number of natural calamities is also increasing and almost every year there is flood, famine, drought, landslides, earthquakes, and many more calamities are increasing.

