The environment is where all living organisms, including humans, reside. Hence, it is important to take care of the environment. Moreover, the environment provides many resources essential to life. For instance, life on earth would not be possible without oxygen, and plants are the main producers of oxygen. Hence, we need to save trees by preventing deforestation.

Water is another essential resource for life. About 71% of the earth’s surface is covered with water; however, just 1% of that is usable freshwater. Hence, conservation of water is important. It helps to reduce the energy required to process and deliver water.


 
Another important aspect of the environment is the food web. A food web is a group of interconnected food chains found in the environment. If any organism on the food chain becomes extinct, the whole food web can become imbalanced and collapse. For instance, the population of an apex predator in an ecosystem may become extinct as a result of human activities. Then the prey population will exponentially rise as there is no natural predator to keep it in check.

Sometimes, these scenarios can affect humans too: If snakes are eliminated from a particular ecosystem, then, the rat population in that ecosystem will rise. This can have undesired consequences on the ecosystem as well as humans. It could lead to a rise in diseases, destruction of crops or stored grains, or wiping out other native organisms in the environment.
In the search of development and progress we are killing our natural environment. Our environment is the only means of our growth.

Life of humans, animals and birds is with this environment. We are carelessly replacing natural environment into artificial one.


 
Instead of greenery, Plantation and natural objects now there exists artificial things like buildings, complexes, streets and vehicles. They emit dangerous gases that pollute our environment.

As it is known that continuity of life on this planet earth is possible with healthy environment. The selfish activities of humans are the biggest threat to our natural healthy environment.

The mankind has been degrading the natural components of  environment. He has been misusing the environment to attain success and prosperity

Our life is interconnected with every component present in our surroundings. The air that we continuously breathe to live, the water which we frequent drink, are the parts of our environment.