Specially man made technological advancement is spoiling our surroundings excessively. It ultimately destroys the balance and equilibrium of nature which is fatal to all living forms on the earth.

All parts of our environment including hydrosphere and lithosphere have been destroyed due to man made environment.


 
It means that the man made technological activities are the sole cause of destruction of our environment.

Environmental degradation is a global issue. It is adversely affecting physical and mental health of humans. It has negatively affected our daily lives.

We are suffering socially, economically, emotionally and intellectually. Environmental contaminants have spread deadly diseases. The whole world is facing the issues caused by the loss of natural environment.

Our environment is being polluted due to industrial waste. The Agricultural waste, increasing population, smoke of vehicles, use of plastic, fossil fuel combustion.

Environmental degradation is the issue of the whole world. If this problem is not addressed properly it will cause loss of life.

The excessive use of fuels to meet our needs is killing our environment and its components like air and water.Our environment provides us all basic and essential ingredients of life. All natural components of our environment are vitally important.


 
Modernization and development has caused sharp increase in environmental degradation. The quality of natural components is at risk. It is decreasing with a rapid pace.

Urbanization and deforestation contribute more in environmental pollution. It is believed that the environment is the source of survival.

All components of environment are our basic needs. Destruction of environment is akin to death of all life forms on this planet earth.

Our lives are entirely built on our natural environment.  We must not change natural environment into an artificial one. It’s our first and foremost responsibility to save our environment.The environment consists of living and non living components. In the  broader sense both living and non-living are interdependent. There is a strong bond of attraction between all elements of environment.

Though air, water and soil are the non-living parts but all living forms depend on these things.  The survival of living organisms is based on all what exist in environment.

All natural components are the real beauty of environment. As trees which are called the green cover of the surface of the earth. They purify air and provide oxygen for the survival of animals and humans.

Nowadays we humans are not mindful enough to understand how, what and why we are consuming the natural resources and wasting non-renewable resources of environment. We are killing the natural components of environment which boost life on earth,

Behind the damage caused in environment, is the grave human involvement.  Hardly any damage is natural. We are abusing our environment which provides us food and shelter.

The whole body of flora and fauna which constitute our natural ecosystem and make our environment beautiful are interwoven.

Plants are the only producers on the surface of earth. All animals get their food from plants. Even human consume plants directly and eat animals which are dependent on plants.