We human are merely consumers.  We depend on environment to live. We can not imagine life without the natural resources present in our environment.

Our life would be lost if we will degrade environment and misuse the natural resources. We can not afford destroying our environment in the name of industrialization and urbanization. Plants and trees are the home of many species of birds, forests are the habitat of wildlife.

It is entirely unjust to cut down trees and forests. They are beauty of our environment. People are polluting water bodies in the search of progress.

We are constructing manufacturing plants on the banks of life-living rivers whose waste matter is thrown into flowing water.

The vehicles and factories emit smoke which pollute air. It is air which gives us life. Human activities has caused a irreparable loss and damage of environment.  We should worship our environment and save it from all types of pollution.The environment is the fundamental source of survival on earth. Men has destroyed the natural environment. The environmental degradation has caused several issues and changes in natural ecosystem which are entirely opposite to the promotion of existence.

All our basic needs like Air, Water and other resources are the components of environment. All natural components are mercilessly misused and are being wasted by human. It is right time to recognize the issues that our environment is facing or life will be lost.

Most importantly we need to clean and purify the air present in environment. It is air which we breathe in to stay alive.

The purification of air is possible when we would stop cutting trees and plant new trees. Trees purify the air and absorb pollutants which degrade the quality of air.

Air pollution is the root cause of other environmental issues. Nowadays most of the diseases are airborne. People are suffering from respiratory ailments and cardiac disorders are caused by contaminants of air.

Our environment is suffering from many disorders which are a big threat to the life on earth. Water and soil are also components of our environment.  We need to use water wisely and carefully. Wastage of water is too deadly a sin.

Misuse of water affects the natural water cycle and cause several issues which tend to affect the life of all living organisms.  Everything that is visible to our eyes is part of our environment and is equally important.

Wastage of one component directly or indirectly affects the other components which ultimately degrade the destroy whole environment.

All flora and fauna are the beauty of our environment.  We need to save these to help sustain the natural charm of environment.

I personally believe it’s we who have caused all environmental issues and its we who can eradicate all problems which are cause by us knowingly or unknowingly.The environment is the basic source of survival for all living organisms on the earth. The concept of life on earth is based on environment and its components. One can not imagine life and existence of all living forms without environment.

At present the whole world is facing many environmental issues which leave an indelible mark on the lives of humans and animals. It is believed that all environmental issues are byproduct of over population.

The massive population growth has affected the fabric of environment. The industrial revolution and progress sought to help feed the increasing population has indirectly affected environment.

Hence one can believe that deforestation and climate change, the most hanging issues of environment,  are caused by the growth in population. The increasing pollution of world is a big threat to environment.

The major environmental issues like pollution, global warming and greenhouse gases are caused by untamed activities of humans.

All issues are men made.  The wanton activities of human are degrading the quality of environment at a stretch.

Our life is constituted on the components of environment.  Unfortunately all natural components of environment like air, water and soil are being misused and polluted carelessly.

The mass destruction of environment took place with the advent of industries and factories. Since last ten decades our environment is constantly losing the charm.

Behind progress and development men exploited all natural resources and adulterated the basic components of environment.

Only Plantation won’t suffice to this cause. We have to reduce pollution and reduce consumption and wastage of natural components and recycle and reuse all basic components which are almost lost.

To restore the lost beauty of environment we need to work actively. Let’s make it our responsibility to educate people about the importance of environment and aware them to save environment.

Pollution, global warming and greenhouse gases are a threat to our environment.  These issue need immediate attention.

Moreover, handling and fighting with these issues of environment will not only save environment but save life and planet earth.

Let’s save trees and plant new trees to make our environment beautiful and healthy.  Let’s save water and reduce its use. Let’s keep earth and soil clean and stop degradation of land.