The entire outlook of the environment has been changed just for the sake of facilitating human needs and comfort. However, despite this drastic change in the environment, the importance of natural resources cannot be denied to humankind. For example-

We use air for breathing. It is an essential requirement of all living organisms without which we cannot even survive for a few seconds.
Trees play significant roles in the environment, whether it is about maintaining oxygen & carbon balance in the atmosphere or preventing soil erosion. 
Water is one of the crucial resources. It is of utmost essential for the survival of all living organisms, but some places on Earth are facing the problem of scarcity of water.
Apart from this, many more natural resources fulfill our needs. We should take the initiative for the security of these natural resources. Hence, save water, stop polluting the air and water, stop deforestation, etc. to protect the environment from getting positive benefits from it.
Above all, human being and their greed for more is the ultimate cause of all the environmental issue.
Now we know the major issues which are causing damage to the environment. So, now we can discuss the ways by which we can save our environment. For doing so we have to take some measures that will help us in fighting environmental issues.

Moreover, these issues will not only save the environment but also save the life and ecosystem of the planet. Some of the ways of minimizing environmental threat are discussed below:

Reforestation – It will not only help in maintaining the balance of the ecosystem but also help in restoring the natural cycles that work with it. Also, it will help in recharge of groundwater, maintaining the monsoon cycle, decreasing the number of carbons from the air, and many more.

The 3 R’s principle – For contributing to the environment one should have to use the 3 R’s principle that is Reduce, Reuse, and Recycle. Moreover, it helps the environment in a lot of ways.

To conclude, we can say that humans are a major source of environmental issues. Likewise, our activities are the major reason that the level of harmful gases and pollutants have increased in the environment. But now the humans have taken this problem seriously and now working to eradicate it. Above all, if all humans contribute equally to the environment then this issue can be fight backed. The natural balance can once again be restored.

Air pollution is one of the major reasons for environmental degradation. The air is getting polluted through various means such as the burning of fossil fuel, emission from industries, greenhouse gas effects, etc.
Water pollution is affecting the environment adversely. A massive amount of chemicals, wastes, pesticides, oil spills, etc. are polluting the water bodies of the Earth.
The land is getting polluted majorly through agricultural activities. Excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides minimizes the quality of soil, which leads to poor productivity.
Sound pollution from various sources (such as vehicles, factories, parties, discos, pubs, etc.) is hurting the health of humans and animals too. 
Deforestation is highly affecting the environment. The benefits of trees are countless. Deforestation is hampering the natural balance of the environment.   
Urbanization and industrialization are big-time responsible for the exploitation of the environment.
