Environment  deteriorates  with  human  activities  such  as  hunting,  deforestation,  land  fragmentation, pollution and limitless use of natural resources. Population of humans increases very rapidly especially in developing countries and it has worst effects on environment. Protecting the environment will cause the biodiversity  conservation.  Different  methods  are  used  for  environmental  protection  such  as environmental  sensitive  governance,  environmental  law,  environmental  sensitive  planning  and environment consciousness. Changing in the features and extinction of species is indication for us to start the  systematic  conservation  planning.  Ecosystem  approaches  and  ecological  developments  are  very helpful to apply global act on biodiversity.
The ecosystem services as the most valuable gift of nature for all life forms especially human beings has made life dynamics and diversified [31]. The ability of ecosystem resilience and self-sustenance under natural condition is act the balance of structural and functional aspects of biosphere. All human societies and ecosystems based on productive and healthy natural environment. 10 million species of animals, plants and microbes are present in this earth [26]. We generally ignored these services and  don’t  give them value until there is any  danger of extinction of these sources [18, 26]. Planning  of  environment  includes  the  environment  protection  through  enhancing  the biodiversity conservation, use of natural resources and ecological services [1]. Environmental protection  planning  must  be  efficient,  economical,  visionary  and  ethical  [28].  Green development term is  mostly used, it does not only relate to reduction in pollution but it also involves in re-establishment of resources, biodiversity and ecological services [18, 28]. Problems of environment have initiated from when man wants to change the environment into that form which he desires [11]. Man exploiting the environment by industrial advance processes which are the main reason of pollution in last century 
unities  occurs  because human  convert  the land  cover. 
 ~ 563 ~ Journal of Entomology and Zoology Studies  Change in extent of disturbance and severity, rate of species invasion, mass extinction and change in global biogeochemical processes are all due to human activities [27, 22]. Organisms are mostly  threatened  from  numerous  factors  such  as  physical habitat  damage,  climate  change,  changes  in  atmosphere, overexploitation, deposition of nitric oxide and diseases [15, 8]. These threats are connected to fundamental drivers which are identified  and  conservation  action  is  done.  Like  keystone species, keystone threats  have strong impact on environment because if we remove the keystone threat it has positive effect on the environment [4, 2] Diagnosis  of  threats  is  required  to  protect  the  freshwater resources. Developed countries use the modern technologies to cope  with the threats  while under  developing countries  face more  problems  to protect  the  fresh  water  biodiversity. Less precautionary measures also lead toward the biodiversity loss; it is considered that habitats that are linked with the 65% of continental discharge are considered as highly threatened [30]. Major  threat  for  the  biodiversity  of  marine  ecosystem  is invasive  species.  These  species  can  be  introduced  by  the variety of ways such as aquaculture and international shipping are considered as major cause [21]. Impact of invasive species increases with the passage of time and it causes threat for other native species as well as it  has worse effect on the  human health. In  the ballast water some developments have been done globally on the 10,000 species. To manage the risk collaboration between the regional trading pattern will be ensured [4, 16]. Nitrogen effect the vegetation diversity when its concentration increases, it effect the eutrophication, acidification, secondary stress  susceptibility and foliage  damage x. Species  of plants that are managed at less nutrient level are mostly effected by the increased level of nitrogen [17]. Climate  change  is  also  considered  as  the  major  cause  of biodiversity  loss.  Different  gases  such  as  ozone,  carbon dioxide,  methane  and  water  vapors  can  cause  greenhouse effect in the atmosphere by trapping the heat in the planet [1]. All  these  gases  are  emitted  by  different  ways  but  it  is considered as the major cause is human activities that are land use  changes,  farming  activities  and  fossil  fuel  burning.  All these  activities increase  the temperature  on the  earth that  is very dangerous for the biodiversity.  According  to  the  fourth  assessment  report  of intergovernmental  panel  on  climate  change  (IPCC)  the increase  in  average  temperature  occur  that is  0.76  0C  from 1850-2005  and  global  mean  sea  level  raised  by  12-22cm during the last century [5].  Major tactics for sustainable use of biodiversity Major harvesting quotas It includes the cap value to bound the intake e.g., if we want to sustain  the fish  harvesting  we should  maintained limits  that can be based on structure of population and changed from time to time. Rules should be present for fishing that protects the fish in its ecosystem and enhance its production [2, 5].  Protection of critical habitats of endangered species It  contains  social  facilitation,  services,  ecological  resources and  community  interactions.  E.g.,  for  feeding  large  space territory  is  basic  need  for  carnivores  and  predatory  birds. When we talk about behavioral requirements and distribution patterns some birds such as herring gulls require large area for courtship  behavior.  If  very  large  population  is  present  and there is no predator is present it will enhance the competition, starvation, disease spreading and at last unhealthy population will result [3, 1] Captive propagation When breeding in captivity occurs it contain many factors such as reduce inbreeding, behavioral alteration and disease risk. In captive breeding  species securing occur e.g., sanctuaries and orphanages [2, 6]  Ecosystem preservation During  ecosystem  preservation  effect  of  climate  change, genetic  conservation,  spread  of  disease,  catastrophic disturbance, requirement of  species at various trophic levels, equitability  of  habitat,  ecology  of  landscape,  availability  of food,  breeding  sites  and  ecosystem  services  are  take  in consideration [2, 6, 15].  Legislation, conventions and public involvement Enactment of rules against pollution, overexploitation, habitat destruction  and  poaching  must  be  followed.  Strategic environmental  assessment  and  environmental  impact assessment tools  must be present.  Public awareness must be present that reduce the biodiversity loss [2, 17].  Conservation The  present  extinction  and  global  crisis  of  biodiversity  has negative  effect  on  the  species.  Biodiversity  conservation  is important to reduce the extinction of biodiversity by humans [3, 12].  Sustainable  development  done  by  ex-situ  or  in-situ conservation such as protection of genetic diversity occurs that is  mostly  threatened  by  the  extinction  [23].  Different international  and national programs  are established to  aware the ex-situ and in-situ conservation such as botanical gardens and  gene banks  are established  for  the ex-situ  conservation. For example gerplasm of crop that is present in the landraces is protected by ex-situ conservation [12]. On  the  other  hand  the  factors  that  enhance  the  in-situ conservation  are  economic  isolation,  land  holding fragmentations,  hill  land agriculture  and  heterogeneous  soil. In-situ conservation preserve the social and biological process for biodiversity evolution [6, 13].  Conclusion Environment  protection  is  very  important  to  conserve  the biodiversity.  Ecosystem  approaches  and  ecological developments  are  very  helpful  to  apply  global  act  on biodiversity.  Population  of  humans  increases  very  rapidly especially  in  developing  countries  it  has  worse  effects  on environment. Ecosystem and species faces  many threats  such as  ozone  depletion,  hazardous  chemicals  and  change  in climate. If we do not take action for environmental protection it  will  lead  toward  decrease  in  biodiversity.  If  society  and government take action for conservation of biodiversity it will enhance  a  better  relationship  between  environment  and humanity.