The Journal of Environmental Protection (JEP) is published monthly and one of most prospective international journals with multiple disciplines. It covers various aspects of environmental issues, such as research, strategies and the state-of-the-art technologies for prediction, prevention and protection addressing up-to-date research in natural and social sciences related to environmental concerns. The journal includes but not limited to research papers, technical reports, subject reviews, short comments and book reviews on relevant aspects of the field. JEP is to provide a platform for scientists, environmentalists, ecologists, project managers, consultants and students wishing to keep abreast of current developments in environmental protection. The journal publishes original papers including but not limited to the following fields:

· Air pollution and air quality Air pollution monitoring and modeling Air pollution prevention and control Air quality measurement and management Sources of air pollution Urban/indoor air pollution and control · Ecosystem restoration, toxicology and sustainability Ecosystem restoration Environmental toxicology Greenhouse gas emission monitoring and solutions Hazardous materials management Radiation safety in atomic industry Solid waste management Sustainable development of environment and ecosystem · Environment assessment and policy Environmental impact assessment Environmental policy Risk assessment of contaminated environments Water resources and quality assessment Water resource protection and sustainable use · Environmental pollution and public health Chemical pollutants and its effects on health Effects of air pollution on public health Food and drug safety control Global climate changes and human health Land pollution and its effects on health · Hydrology and water quality Ground water pollution control Hydrobiology and water pollution Methods of monitoring water quality Modeling and measuring of water pollution · Wastewater treatment and utilization New wastewater treatment technologies New water purification technologies Purification of drinking-water supplies Treatment, disposal and discharge of wastewater
Environmental protection and health protection are inextricably linked. The World Health Organization
estimates that environmental hazards are responsible for as much as a quarter of the total burden of
disease worldwide, and that as many as 13 million deaths could be prevented every year by improving
environmental quality. Conversely, when ecosystems are maintained in good condition they provide
direct health benefits: a growing body of evidence demonstrates the value of contact with nature in
the prevention/treatment of conditions including stress, depression and obesity. Research in this area
provides the evidence base that underpins policy development and informs responses on key issues
(e.g. air pollution, emerging pollutants). By developing expertise and establishing a knowledge base,
activities and policies with environmental impacts can be managed to guard against undue negative
effects on human health.
Research in the Biodiversity thematic area contributes to enhancing our natural resources by forming a
better understanding of the pressures on biodiversity; of how to prevent and reduce these pressures;
and the ways to improve the policies for biodiversity conservation and protection. Research also focuses
on collecting information on status, trends and distribution of key habitats and species of national/EU
interest. Research under this theme complements the work undertaken by the National Parks & Wildlife
Service (NPWS) and the National Biodiversity Data Centre.
Soil is a complex, biologically active mixture of weathered minerals (sand, silt and clay), organic matter,
organisms, air and water that provides the foundation for life in terrestrial ecosystems. The soil of Ireland
is a valuable and finite national resource, which forms and evolves slowly over very long periods of time.
However, it can be damaged and even lost relatively quickly. Research in this thematic area is intended
to provide scientific knowledge to underpin the protection and sustainable use of soil through a better
understanding of soil and its functions; by preventing threats to soil and mitigating their effects. The key
driver for this area is the Thematic Strategy for Soil Protection (COM(2006) 231).
Land is subject to many competing demands. We rely on our land resource for food, energy
(increasingly), forestry, and recreational opportunities. The rate and nature of land-use changes indicate
where future environmental pressures are likely to arise. The drivers in this area are diverse, and include
the Environmental Liabilities Directive, the Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive, the Habitats
Directive, Regional Planning Guidelines,
Many of the environmental strategies and much of the legislation being developed at EU level cover
aspects of the environment or ways of managing the environment that are new and require new
approaches. Much of the practical development of these new approaches are implemented at Member
State level.
It is necessary to gain a good understanding of the socio-economic aspects of environmental protection
to ensure that measures taken to protect the environment do not place undue burdens on enterprise and
society. Similarly, research provides a strong knowledge base for negotiations on binding international
commitments at EU and wider international contexts.
The “green economy” is a term used to categorise a wide range of economic activities contributing
to lower greenhouse gas emissions and better resource usage, while also functioning as commercial
businesses. Establishing a sustainable pattern of development is a key challenge for Ireland. Improved
resource efficiency is a top priority to achieve this goal and is also one of the seven flagship initiatives
within the Europe 2020 Strategy and the Eco-Innovation Action Plan.
The research programme provides financial and administrative support for the development of a smart
green economy through the co-funding of Irish businesses through the Cleaner Greener Production
Programme (CGPP) which is managed under the National Waste Prevention Programme.
Although the focus of the EPA STRIVE programme is on policy-supporting research, some of the funded
research has the potential to develop commercial opportunities. This was highlighted in the Innovation
for a Green Economy report (Donlon et al., 2009), which showcased EPA-funded research in this area
including the development of biodegradable plastics, nanotechnology filters for water treatment, and
energy generation from sewage treatment. The EPA engages with Enterprise Ireland and other state
agencies to highlight such possibilities, and further opportunities are expected to arise through the
national research prioritisation framework in areas such as “smart grids & smart cities”, “sustainable
food production and processing”, “manufacturing competitiveness” and “processing technologies &
novel materials areas”9