Necessary steps must be taken to clean the environment and prevent any further damage to it. Following are some important points to the preservation of a clean environment:

Make Environment Friendly Policies
Environment friendly policies are in a lay man’s term the guidelines for industrial or infrastructural development that claim reduced or minimal effect on the environment. A government while making political decisions for the growth of industries and urbanization should consider its impact on the environment and take necessary steps to minimize it.

Plant a Tree
A society and an individual should take active part in adding to a clean and healthy environment by pledging to plant a tree in the surroundings every weekends or on off days.

Reduce your Electricity Usage
Using too much of electricity increases its demand which results in increased production of electricity consequently resulting in more burning of fuel, usage of water and emission of tons of CO2 gas in the environment, leading to global warming. Usage of renewable energy sources like wind and water etc instead of conventional sources results in the reduction of environmental pollution.

Go Paperless
Reduce the use of paper in your work place. A decreased demand for paper will reduce cutting of trees. Spread awareness among your colleagues and fellow students or society about the importance of trees and their contribution towards a clean air and how we can help in their preservation by reducing the usage of paper in our offices, schools, hospitals and other establishments.

Buy Recycled Products
By purchasing products with recycled content you prevent those materials from ending up in a landfill and do your part to maintain consumer demand for recyclables and ensure the continuation of a balanced eco system.

Go Green on Transport
Transportation alone accounts for a quarter of all the green house gases emission. So, next time if you plan a trip to your favorite place with family and friends avoid using more number of vehicles than actually needed or use public transport if it is safe to do so. People around the world are developing an affinity towards vehicles those have zero emission such as vehicles running on electricity or solar energy.

Use of Organic Pesticides
Overuse of chemical fertilizers and pesticides have adverse effect on the soil organisms similar to human overuse of anti biotic. While beneficial for agricultural crops they can have a negative effect on the health of species directly or indirectly exposed to such environment. Use of Organic pesticides which are made up of minerals or other plant materials that keep pests at bay and break down quickly in the soil help prevent pollution due to hazardous chemicals. Some examples are Cayenne pepper spray, neem, sabadilla, pyrethrin, soap spray, etc.

Building Environment Friendly Cities
Government should frame laws that plan and provide cities that are environment friendly and consider clean environment as the basic need of its people. Government should encourage sustainable use of urban resources and encourage the use of green energy.

Buildings and houses should be designed in a way so as to use natural resources to the fullest. Permitting sun light to the maximum into a building will result in the reduction of electricity usage. Steps should be taken for the accumulation and conservation of rain water to meet every day water requirements.

Steps to Keep Population under Control
Government should form and implement policies to keep population under control, Ensuring availability of natural resources like water and clean air for all. Laws formed against Child marriage should be strictly implemented. Medical facilities must be provided to each and every citizen whether he is residing in a city or a remote area.

People must be made aware of the hazards of the population explosion and its effects on the environment and depletion of natural resources.

Don’t Litter
Littering is the major problem faced largely by the developing nations and those with high tourist influx. People tend to litter waste in their surroundings resulting in accumulation of garbage and consequently pollution of the environment.

Necessary laws should be formed to check such littering and stern action must be taken against those found involved in it. Such garbage not only results in pollution but also generates foul smell making residence in the nearby areas impossible. It leads to bad condition of society and arrival of diseases. Necessary steps must be taken for the disposal of garbage to help preserve the environment.

Grow your Food Locally
Planting your food locally results in the reduced demand for transportation of food items. It also reduces the demand for pesticides, which pollute the air directly. Organic food results in the reduction of the use of pesticides and other hazardous chemicals and improvement of the eco system.

Segregate your Waste
Waste segregation means dividing your waste into dry and wet waste. Segregated waste can be used for recycling and it also ensures that no waste goes into the environment and all the waste is recycled for the useful purposes.

Conclusion

A clean environment is the basic need of today’s society which is plagued with industrialization, growing cities, and increase in number of transportation vehicles.

One of the commendable initiative taken by the UN to curb environmental pollution is “The World Environment Day”, celebrated on 5th June every year, to raise awareness and urge governments, individuals and societies to come together and take steps to eradicate the use of plastics in our day to day life and other factors contributing to the environmental pollution in our daily life and taking necessary steps to prevent them. India recently hosted the World Environment Day on 5th June 2018 with theme of “Beat Plastic Pollution”.