The science of Environment studies is a multi-disciplinary science because it comprises
various branches of studies like chemistry, physics, medical science, life science, agriculture,
public health, sanitary engineering etc. It is the science of physical phenomena in
the environment. It studies of the sources, reactions, transport, effect and fate of physical
a biological species in the air, water and soil and the effect of from human activity upon
these.
Literary environment means the surrounding external conditions influencing
development or growth of people, animal or plants; living or working conditions etc. This
involves three questions:
1. What is Surrounded
The answer to this question is living objects in general and man in particular.
2. By what Surrounded
The physical attributes are the answer to this question, which become environment. In
fact, the concern of all education is the environment of man. However, man cannot exist or
be understood in isolation from the other forms of life and from plant life. Hence, environment
refers to the sum total of condition, which surround point in space and time. The scope of
the term Environment has been changing and widening by the passage of time. In the
primitive age, the environment consisted of only physical aspects of the planted earth' land,
air and water as biological communities. As the time passed on man extended his environment
through his social, economic and political functions.
3. Where Surrounded
The answer to this question. It is in nature that physical component of the plant earth,
viz land, air, water etc., support and affect life in the biosphere. According to a Goudie
1
CHAPTER
Environmental Science : 1 Definition, Scope and Importance
2 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
environment is the representative of physical components of the earth where in man is an
important factor affecting the environment.
(i) Definitions of Environment : Some important definitions of environment are as
under:
1. Boring: ‘A person’s environment consists of the sum total of the stimulation
which he receives from his conception until his death.’
It can be concluded from the above definition that Environment comprises
various types of forces such as physical, intellectual, economic, political,
cultural, social, moral and emotional. Environment is the sum total of all the
external forces, influences and conditions, which affect the life,
nature, behaviour and the growth, development and maturation of living
organisms.
2. Douglas and Holland: ‘The term environment is used to describe, in the
aggregate, all the external forces, influences and conditions, which affect the
life, nature, behaviour and the growth, development and maturity of living
organisms.’
(ii) Scope of Environment: The environment consists of four segments as under:
1. Atmosphere: The atmosphere implies the protective blanket of gases,
surrounding the earth:
(a) It sustains life on the earth.
(b) It saves it from the hostile environment of outer space.
(c) It absorbs most of the cosmic rays from outer space and a major portion of the
electromagnetic radiation from the sun.
(d) It transmits only here ultraviolet, visible, near infrared radiation (300 to 2500
nm) and radio waves. (0.14 to 40 m) while filtering out tissue-damaging ultraviolate waves below about 300 nm.
The atmosphere is composed of nitrogen and oxygen. Besides, argon, carbon dioxide,
and trace gases.
2. Hydrosphere: The Hydrosphere comprises all types of water resources oceans,
seas, lakes, rivers, streams, reserviour, polar icecaps, glaciers, and ground
water.
(i) Nature 97% of the earth’s water supply is in the oceans,
(ii) About 2% of the water resources is locked in the polar icecaps and glaciers.
(iii)Only about 1% is available as fresh surface water-rivers, lakes streams, and
ground water fit to be used for human consumption and other uses.
3. Lithosphere: Lithosphere is the outer mantle of the solid earth. It consists
of minerals occurring in the earth’s crusts and the soil e.g. minerals, organic
matter, air and water.
4. Biosphere: Biosphere indicates the realm of living organisms and their
interactions with environment, viz atmosphere, hydrosphere and lithosphere.
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE : DEFINITION, SCOPE AND IMPORTANCE 3
Element of Environment
Environment is constituted by the interacting systems of physical, biological and cultural
elements inter-related in various ways, individually as well as collectively. These elements
may be explained as under:
(1) Physical elements
Physical elements are as space, landforms, water bodies, climate soils, rocks and minerals.
They determine the variable character of the human habitat, its opportunities as well as
limitations.
(2) Biological elements
Biological elements such as plants, animals, microorganisms and men constitute the
biosphere.
(3) Cultural elements
Cultural elements such as economic, social and political elements are essentially manmade features, which make cultural milieu.
ENVIRONMENT STUDIES: IMPORTANCE
Importance of Environment Studies: The environment studies enlighten us, about the
importance of protection and conservation of our indiscriminate release of pollution into the
environment.
At present a great number of environment issues, have grown in size and complexity
day by day, threatening the survival of mankind on earth. We study about these issues
besides and effective suggestions in the Environment Studies. Environment studies have
become significant for the following reasons:
1. Environment Issues Being of International Importance
It has been well recognised that environment issues like global warming and ozone
depletion, acid rain, marine pollution and biodiversity are not merely national issues but are
global issues and hence must be tackled with international efforts and cooperation.
2. Problems Cropped in The Wake of Development
Development, in its wake gave birth to Urbanization, Industrial Growth, Transportation
Systems, Agriculture and Housing etc. However, it has become phased out in the developed
world. The North, to cleanse their own environment has, fact fully, managed to move ‘dirty’
factories of South. When the West developed, it did so perhaps in ignorance of the
environmental impact of its activities. Evidently such a path is neither practicable nor
desirable, even if developing world follows that.
3. Explosively Increase in Pollution
World census reflects that one in every seven persons in this planted lives in India.
Evidently with 16 per cent of the world's population and only 2.4 per cent of its land area,
there is a heavy pressure on the natural resources including land. Agricultural experts have
recognized soils health problems like deficiency of micronutrients and organic matter, soil
salinity and damage of soil structure.
4 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
4. Need for An Alternative Solution
It is essential, specially for developing countries to find alternative paths to an alternative
goal. We need a goal as under:
(1) A goal, which ultimately is the true goal of development an environmentally sound
and sustainable development.
(2) A goal common to all citizens of our earth.
(3) A goal distant from the developing world in the manner it is from the over-consuming
wasteful societies of the “developed” world.
5. Need To Save Humanity From Extinction
It is incumbent upon us to save the humanity from exinction. Consequent to our activities
constricting the environment and depleting the biosphere, in the name of development.
6. Need For Wise Planning of Development
Our survival and sustenance depend. Resources withdraw, processing and use of the
product have all to by synchronised with the ecological cycles in any plan of development our
actions should be planned ecologically for the sustenance of the environment and development.
7. Misra’s Report
Misra (1991) recognized four basic principles of ecology, as under:
(i) Holism
(ii) Ecosystem
(iii) Succession
(iv) Conversation.
Holism has been considered as the real base of ecology. In hierarchical levels at which
interacting units of ecology are discussed, are as under:
Individual<population<community<ecosystem<biome<biosphere.
Misra (1991) has recognised four basic requirements of environmental management as
under:
(i) Impact of human activities on the environment,
(ii) Value system,
(iii) Plan and design for sustainable development,
(iv) Environment education.
Keeping in view the of goal of planning for environmentally sustainable development
India contributed to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
(UNCED), also referred to as “Earth Summit” held at Rio de Janciro, the Capital of Brazil,
3rd-14th June, 1992.
NEED FOR PUBLIC AWARENESS
It is essential to make the public aware of the formidable consequences of the
Environmental Degradation, if not retorted and reformative measures undertaken, would
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE : DEFINITION, SCOPE AND IMPORTANCE 5
result in the extinction of life. We are facing various environmental challenges. It is essential
to get the country acquainted with these challenges so that their acts may be eco-friendly.
Some of these challenges are as under:
1. Growing Population
A population of over thousands of millions is growing at 2.11 per cent every year. Over
17 million people are added each year. It puts considerable pressure on its natural resources
and reduces the gains of development. Hence, the greatest challenge before us is to limit the
population growth. Although population control does automatically lead to development, yet
the development leads to a decrease in population growth rates. For this development of the
women is essential.
2. Poverty
India has often been described a rich land with poor people. The poverty and
environmental degradation have a nexus between them. The vast majority of our people are
directly dependent on the nature resources of the country for their basic needs of food, fuel
shelter and fodder. About 40% of our people are still below the poverty line. Environment
degradation has adversely affected the poor who depend upon the resources of their immediate
surroundings. Thus, the challenge of poverty and the challenge environment degradation
are two facets of the same challenge. The population growth is essentially a function of
poverty. Because, to the very poor, every child is an earner and helper and global concerns
have little relevance for him.
3. Agricultural Growth
The people must be acquainted with the methods to sustain and increase agricultural
growth with damaging the environment. High yielding varities have caused soil salinity and
damage to physical structure of soil.
4. Need to Ground water
It is essential of rationalizing the use of groundwater. Factors like community wastes,
industrial effluents and chemical fertilizers and pesticides have polluted our surface water
and affected quality of the groundwater. It is essential to restore the water quality of our
rivers and other water bodies as lakes is an important challenge. It so finding our suitable
strategies for consecration of water, provision of safe drinking water and keeping water
bodies clean which are difficult challenges is essential.
5. Development And Forests
Forests serve catchments for the rivers. With increasing demand of water, plan to
harness the mighty river through large irrigation projects were made. Certainly, these
would submerge forests; displace local people, damage flora and fauna. As such, the dams
on the river Narmada, Bhagirathi and elsewhere have become areas of political and scientific
debate.
Forests in India have been shrinking for several centuries owing to pressures of
agriculture and other uses. Vast areas that were once green, stand today as wastelands.
These areas are to be brought back under vegetative cover. The tribal communities inhabiting
forests respects the trees and birds and animal that gives them sustenance. We must recognise
6 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
the role of these people in restoring and conserving forests. The modern knowledge and
skills of the forest deptt. should be integrated with the traditional knowledge and experience
of the local communities. The strategies for the joint management of forests should be
evolved in a well planned way.
6. Degradation of Land
At present out of the total 329 mha of land, only 266 mha possess any potential for
production. Of this, 143 mha is agricultural land nearly and 85 suffers from varying degrees
of soil degradation. Of the remaining 123 mha, 40 are completely unproductive. The remaining
83 mha is classified as forest land, of which over half is denuded to various degrees. Nearly
406 million head of livestock have to be supported on 13 mha, or less than 4 per cent of the
land classified as pasture land, most of which is overgrazed. Thus, our of 226 mha, about
175 mha or 66 per cent is degraded to varying degrees. Water and wind erosion causes
further degradation of almost 150 mha This degradation is to be avoided.
7. Reorientation of Institutions
The people should be roused to orient institutions, attitudes and infrastructures, to suit
conditions and needs today. The change has to be brought in keeping in view India’s traditions
for resources use managements and education etc. Change should be brought in education,
in attitudes, in administrative procedures and in institutions. Because it affects way people
view technology resources and development.
8. Reduction of Genetic Diversity
Proper measures to conserve genetic diversity need to be taken. At present most wild
genetic stocks have been disappearing from nature. Wilding including the Asiatic Lion are
facing problem of loss of genetic diversity. The protected areas network like sanctuaries,
national parks, biosphere reserves are isolating populations. So, they are decreasing changes
of one group breeding with another. Remedial steps are to be taken to check decreasing
genetic diversity.
9. Evil Consequences of Urbanisation
Nearly 27 per cent Indians live in urban areas. Urbanisation and industrialisation has
given birth to a great number of environmental problem that need urgent attention. Over
30 percent of urban Indians live in slums. Out of India’s 3,245 towns and cities, only 21 have
partial or full sewerage and treatment facilities. Hence, coping with rapid urbanization is
a major challenge.
10. Air and water Population
Majority of our industrial plants are using outdated and population technologies and
makeshift facilities devoid of any provision of treating their wastes. A great number of cities
and industrial areas that have been identified as the worst in terms of air and water
pollution. Acts are enforced in the country, but their implement is not so easy. The reason
is their implementation needs great resources, technical expertise, political and social will.
Again the people are to be made aware of these rules. Their support is indispensable to
implement these rules.
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE : DEFINITION, SCOPE AND IMPORTANCE 7
VARIOUS TYPES OF ENVIRONMENT
According to Kurt Lewin, environment is of three types which influence the personality
of an individual as under:
(a) Physical Environment,
(b) Social and Cultural Environment, and
(c) Psychological Environment.
These may be explained as under:
1. Physical Environment
Physical environment, refers to geographical climate and weather or physical conditions
wherein and individual lives. The human races are greatly influenced by the climate. Some
examples are as under:
(a) In the cold countries i.e. European countries the people are of white colour. Likewise,
in Asian and African countries, that is, in hot countries people are of dark complexion.
(b) The physique of an individual depends on climate conditions as the individual tries
to adjust in his physical environment.
(d) The human working efficiency also depends on the climatic conditions.
2. Social Environment
Social Environment includes an individual’s social, economic and political condition
wherein he lives. The moral, cultural and emotional forces influence the life and nature of
individual behaviour. Society may be classified into two categories as under:
(i) An open society is very conductive for the individual developement.
(ii) A closed society is not very conductive for the developenment.
3. Psychological Environment
Although physical and social environment are common to the individual in a specific
situation. Yet every individual has his own psychological environment, in which he lives.
Kurt Lewin has used the term ‘life space’ for explaining psychological environment. The
Psychological environment enables us to understand the personality of an individual. Boththe person and his goal form psychological environment.
If a person is unable to overcome the barriers, he can either get frustrated or completed
to change his goal for a new psychological environment. But adopting this mechanism, the
individual is helped in his adjustment to the environment.
STRUCTURE OF ENVIRONMENT
Environment is both physical and biological. It includes both living and non-living
components.
(i) Physical Environment
The Physical Environment is classified into three broad categories viz.
8 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
(i) Solid,
(ii) Liquid
(iii) Gas.
These represent the following spheres:
(i) The lithosphere (solid earth)
(ii) The hydrosphere (water component) and
(iii) The atmosphere
As such, the three basic of physical environment may be termed as under:
(i) Lithospheric Environment
(ii) Hydrospheric Environment
(iii) Atmospheric Environment
The scientists have classified them into smaller units based on different spatial scales,
e.g.
(i) Mountain Environment
(ii) Glacier Environment
(iii) Plateau Environment
(iv) Coastal Environment
(ii) Biological Environment
The biological of the environment consists of:
(i) Plants (flora)
(ii) Animals (fauna).
Thus, the biotic environment further be divided into floral environment and faunal
environment. All the organisms work to form their social groups and organizations at several
levels. Thus, the social environment is formed. In this social environment the organisms
work to derive matter from the physical environment for their sustenance and development.
This process gives birth to economic environment. Man claims to be most skilled and civilized
of all the organisms. This is the reason why his social organisation is most systematic. The
three aspects of man, e.g. physical, social and economic, function in the biotic environment
as under:
(i) The Physical Man
The ‘Physical Man’ is one of the organisms populations or biological community. He is
in need of basic elements of the physical environment like habitat (space), air, water and
food. Besides, like other biological populations, he releases wastes into the ecosystem.
(ii) The Social Man
The ‘Social Man’ performs the following functions:
(a) Establishing social institutions,
(b) Forming social organisations,
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE : DEFINITION, SCOPE AND IMPORTANCE 9
(c) Formulating laws, principles and policies,
(d) Taking steps to safeguard his existence, interest and social welfare.
(iii) The Economic Man
The economic man derives and utilises resources from the physical and biotic environment
with his skills and technologies. The economic function makes the man an environment/
geomorphic process as he transports matter and energy from one component of the ecosystem
to the other. There may be any following two situations:
(a) His exploitative functions may be in harmony with the natural environment. Such,
functions do not necessarily involve change in the working of the ecosystem.
(b) These functions may exceed the critical limit. Consequently, the equilibrium of the
environment/ecosystem is disturbed and a great number of environment and
ecological problems crop up. These are determental to man him besides to whole
population of human species in a given ecosystem.
A natural resource may be defined as any material given to us by nature which can be
transformed in a way that it becomes more valuable and useful.
For an example wood is used for making furniture. Yarn obtained from cotton is used
for weaving cloth. Likewise, various machine, tools and household goods are made of metals.
Now furniture, clothes, machine, tools are more valuable than their raw form i.e. raw form
i.e. wood, cotton and metal, respectively. The wood, metal resources. It is impossible to
obtain valuable items from any resources. Thus, water, minerals, forests, wildlife as well as
human beings are resources. Any material may be called, as a resource provided and
appropriate technology is available to transform that into more valuable goods.
Meaning of Deforestation
Deforestation is the process of felling trees indiscriminately resulting in nude or seminude surface of the hill hitherto covered by thick forests.
Causes of Deforestation
Main causes responsible for deforestation are as under:
(a) Felling of trees to meet the ever increasing demand of the cities.
(b) Grazing by the local cattle, goats, sheep etc. They not only destroy the vegetation
but also pull out the roots of plants. After denudation of our Himalayas, the process
of deforestation started in the Shivalik range. Shivalik sal forests were over-exploited
for industry use, i.e. railway sleepers etc. Consequently, the foothills of the Shivaliks
are in semi desert conditions.
(c) Meeting out the growing hunger for land. It has hit the ecology of the country badly
very soon India is likely to have more of wasteland than productive land. 
With deforestation ecological balance maintain by nature breaks away. Floods or drought
are the terrible consequences. The trees, increase rainfall of an area, as well as conserve the
water which falls on the ground rain. Consequent to deforestation, the plant reduces
evaporation allowing water to remain in solid for a long time.
In our country unabated deforestation over grazing and the growing hunger for land
has hit the ecology of India badly. If it goes on, we may soon have more of wasteland than
productive land. Large-scale deforestation has badly affected the weather. Evil consequences
of deforestation can be summed up as under:
Ground water resources are abundant only in the northern and coastal plains. In other
parts its supply is not adequate. Ground water is roughly 210 million m3
. This quantity
includes recharge through infiltration, seepage and evaporisation. Even at present, our
country has not been able to provide safe drinking water to all villages and towns.
Ground water contains dissolved minerals from the soil layers through which it passes.
In the process of seepage through the ground, the water gets depleted of most of the
microorganism originally present in the surface water. Though the salt content may be
excessively high on occasions, it is generally superior as a domestic water source. Surface
water contains a lot of organic matter and mineral nutrients, which feed algae and large
bacteria populations.
Humans are a part of the environment, but their activities are not, as they do not coincide with the natural environment. Hence, such environments are called artificial environments. As a general rule of thumb, any human interaction with the natural environment converts the same into an artificial environment.

Acts such as the installation of solar panels in a desert, construction of huts made of muds transform the natural environment into an artificial one. However, when animals build structural which support their living, they still are considered as natural.

The environment provides many resources, from medicine to food. Moreover, the environment is home to countless species of organisms, some of which are on the verge of extinction. Another factor accelerating the extinction of organisms is the destruction of their environments. Most organisms need their natural habitat to thrive. Without it, organisms may perish.

Anthropological activities, such as the burning of fossil fuels, have brought severe repercussions. Increased levels of air pollution have led to many respiratory illnesses in humans. On a global scale, burning fossil fuels have pumped vast quantities of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. The immediate consequence of this is global temperatures will increase. As a result, ice caps will start to melt, and sea levels will rise. Natural calamities will strike with more intensity and frequency. If these activities are unchecked, then a phenomenon called Runaway greenhouse effect might occur. Though this scenario is “mostly” hypothetical, scientists say that such a phenomenon is responsible for Venus’s hellish atmosphere.