The goal of any finance function is to achieve three benefits: business support service, lowest costs and
effective control of the environment. Money is the lifeblood of a business and finance is the nerve
center. Finance is required to promote or create a business, gain assets, develop products, run market
surveys, advertise. The conventional view of finances focuses on being reactive, efficient, and
quantitative and risk averse. New innovative views focus on being vision-oriented, opportunity and
growth focused, intuitive and risk-taking. In this unit we shall discuss the importance of accounting and
finance in the global business and its role in managing the business effectively. In addition to this we shall also
study about the types of markets, their functions and different types of financial instruments used in raising the
funds. We shall also be discussing the significance of financial reporting.
Accounting Simplified: There are certain basic accounting terms which are daily used in the
business world. Before recording the transactions in the books, it is essential to understand these terms
as these terms have their specific meaning in Accounting. These basic terms are called accounting
terminology. They are as follows:
Business Transaction :--- A business transaction is an economic activity of the business that changes
its financial position. Whenever any business transaction takes place, it results in a change in the values
of some of the assets, liabilities or capital.
The chief features of a transaction are:--
It involves an economic activity. For example, when goods are purchased or sold for cash or on credit or
when salaries are paid to employees or when interest is paid on money borrowed from the bank, a
business transaction takes place. Social activities are not considered as transaction because it is social
engagement.
Transactions may be classified into two types – external and internal. External transactions are those
which involve economic activities between two independent business entities such as purchase or sale of
goods. Internal transactions are those economic activities that take place entirely within one business
entity such as depreciation charged on fixed assets.
It results in a change in the financial position of the firm – a change in the values of some of the assets,
liabilities or capital.
The change must be capable of being expressed in terms of money. Loss of goods by fire or the losses
due to a customer‘s inability to pay are transactions because the losses can be measured in terms of 
money. However, when an efficient manager retires from the firm, the loss to the business may be quite
large, but since it cannot be measure in terms of money, it will not be a business transaction.
Assets: -- Anything which is in the possession or is the property of a business enterprise including the
amounts due to it forms others is called an asset. In other words, anything which will enable a business
enterprise to get cash or a benefit in future is an asset. Thus, Cash and Bank balances, Stock, Furniture,
Machinery, land and Building, Bills Receivable, Money owing by Debtors etc. are all assets.
―Assets are future economic benefits, the rights of which are owned or controlled by an organization or
individual.‖
Tangible and Intangible Assets :--- Tangible assets are those assets which can be seen and touched. In
other words, which have a physical existence such as Land, Building, Plant, Furniture, Stock, Cash etc.
Intangible assets are those assets which do not have a physical existence and which cannot be seen or
felt. Examples of such assets are Goodwill, Patents, Trade Marks and Prepaid Expenses, Intangible
assets are also valuable assets. For example, with the help of Patents(known-how) businessman is able
to produce goods and his goodwill helps in attracting customers easily. Therefore the intangible asset
help the firm in earning profits as much as the tangible assets. Hence, both tangible and intangible are
valuable assets. Value of intangible assets is based on the benefit and facility available to the business
from such assets.
Wasting Assets:-- Wasting assets are those assets which are consumed through being worked or used,
such as mines. As soon as all the minerals have been extracted, the mine becomes valueless. Oil wells 
have the same characteristics. Wasting assets also include assets which get exhausted with the lapse of
time, such as patents, Trade Marks, Leasehold Properties etc.
Liability :-- It refers to the amount which the firm owes to outsiders (expecting the amount owed to
proprietors). In the words of Finney and Miller, ―Liabilities are debts, they are amounts owed to
Creditors.‖ This can be expressed as:

Thus, when a firm purchases goods on credit form A, the amount owing to A is a liability. Likewise
when a bank account is overdrawn, the amount owing to bank (i.e., bank overdraft) is known as a
liability. Likewise the Bills Payable, Creditors, Unpaid Wages are also the examples of liabilities. 
Capital Expenditure:--- Any expenditure which is incurred in acquiring or increasing the value of a fixed
asset is termed as capital expenditure. As such, the amount spent on the purchase or erection of
Building, Plant, Furniture etc. is capital expenditure. Such expenditure yields benefit over a long period
and hence written in Assets.
(ii) Revenue Expenditure:--- Any expenditure, the full benefit of which is received during one accounting
period is termed as revenue expenditure. As such, all the revenue expenditures are debited to Trading
and Profit & Loss Account. Such expenditure does not result in an increase in the earning capacity of the
business but only helps in maintaining the existing earning capacity. It also does not bring into existence
an asset of an enduring nature.
Revenue:--- Revenue in accounting means the income of a recurring (regular) nature from any source.
It consists of the amount received from sale of goods and from service provided to customers. It also
includes receipt of rent, commission, dividend, interest etc. Revenue is related to day-to-day affairs of
the business and should also be regular in nature. As such, the amount of capital introduced by the
proprietor or borrowing loan is not revenue.
Debtors :--- The term ‗Debtors‘ represents those persons or firms to whom goods have been sold or
services rendered on credit and payment has not been received from them. They still owe some amount
to the business. For example, if goods worth Rs. 10,000 have been sold to Mohan on Credit, he will
continue to remain the debtor of the business so long as, he does not make the full payment.
Receivables: --- Amount due from Debtors and Bill Receivables(B/R) is jointly termed as ‗Receivables‘
or ‗Accounts Receivables‘.
Creditors:-- The term ‗Creditors‘ represents those persons or firms from whom goods have been
purchased or services procured on credit and payment has not been made to them. Some money is still
owing to them. For example, if goods worth Rs. 5,000 are purchased from Govind on Credit, he will
continue to remain the creditor of the firm so long as, the full payment is not made to him.
Payables:-- Amount due to Creditors and for Bill Payables (B/P) is jointly termed as ‗Payables‘ or
‗accounts payable‘.
Goods:-- Goods include all those things which are purchased for resale or which are used for producing
the finished products which are also meant to be sold. Thus, for a furniture dealer purchase of chairs and
tables is termed as goods, while for others it is furniture and is termed as an asset. Similarly, for a
stationary trader, stationary is goods, whereas for others it is expense.
Cost:-- Cost can be termed be as the amount of resources given up in exchange for some goods or
services. The resources given up are money or money‘s equivalent expressed in terms of money. The
Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA), London has defined the term cost as follows
―Cost is the amount of expenditure (actual or national) incurred on, or attributable to a specified thing or 
activity‖. The specific thing or activity may be a product , service or any activity. Further, the
expenditure incurred may be actual or national. The amount spent on the purchase of raw materials is
the actual expenditure whereas national expenditure is one which does not involve any cash outlay.
National expenditure is conceptual and deemed to have been incurred, e.g. rent of owned factory,
interest on owned capital etc.
Gain:--- It is a monetary benefit , profit or advantage resulting from events or transactions which are
accidental to business such as sale of fixed assets, winning a court case or appreciation in the value of an
asset. For example, if a building costing Rs. 6,00,000 is sold for Rs. 7,00,000; Rs. 1,00,000 will be gain
on sale of building.
Stock or Inventory:--- The term ‗stock‘ includes the value of those goods which are lying unsold at the
end of accounting period. The Stock may be of two types:---
(i) Opening Stock (ii) Closing Stock
The term ‗Opening Stock‘ means the value of goods lying unsold at the beginning of the accounting
period whereas the term ‗Closing Stock‘ means the value of goods lying unsold at the end of the
accounting period.
Types of Stocks :--- In case of a manufacturer , there can be opening and closing stocks of three types:--
-
(i) Stock of Raw Material :-- It includes stock of raw materials purchased for using them in products
manufactured but still lying unused. For example, the value of cotton in case of cloth mills is the stock
of raw material.
(ii) Stock of Work-in-progress:-- It is also termed as stock of partly finished goods. It means goods in semifinished form. Such goods need further processing for converting into finished products. For the
valuation of work in progress, the value of raw materials used in it, the cost of labor, power, fuel and
other expenses on proportionate basis are included. In case of cloth mills the value of threads and the
unfinished clothe will be the stock of work in progress.
(iii) Stock of Finished Goods :--- It includes the stock of those goods which have been completely processed
and are ready for sale but are lying unsold at the end of the accounting period. In case of cloth mills the
value of finished cloth will be the value of finished goods.
Calculation of Closing Stock:--- To ascertain the value of the closing stock, a complete list of all the
items in the godown together with their quantities is prepared. Also the separate lists should be prepared
for raw materials, semi-finished goods and finished goods in the stores. Preparation of such lists is
called ‗stock taking‘.
Care should be taken that the following goods are not included in the list of stocks:---
I. Goods which have been sold but remain undelivered.
II. Goods purchased and received but which have not been recorded in the purchase book.
Following goods should be included in the list of stocks:---
I. Goods sent to the customers on sale or return basis.
II. Goods sent to the agents for sale but remain lying with them as unsold.
It should always be kept in mind that stock is valued at cost price or realizable value, whichever is less. 
Purchases:--- The term purchases is used only for the purchase of ‗Goods‘ in which the business deals.
In case of manufacturing concern ‗goods‘ means acquiring of raw material for the purpose of conversion
into finished product and then sale. In case of trading concern ‗goods‘ are those things which are
purchased for resale. In both the cases the purpose is to make a profit by its resale. For example, if a
cloth dealer purchases cloth for sale, the cloth so purchased will be called ‗goods‘. However, if the same
cloth dealer purchases furniture for seating the customers, such furniture will not be termed as goods,
but it will be an ‗Asset‘ and a separate account named ‗Furniture Account‘ will be opened for it.
The term purchases includes both cash purchases and credit purchases of goods.
Purchase Return :--- When purchased goods are returned to the suppliers these are known as returns.
Such returns are also termed as ‗return outwards‘.
Sales :--- The term ‗sales‘ is used only for the sales of those goods which are purchased for resale
purposes. It also includes revenues from services provided to customers. The term ‗sales‘ is never used
for sale of assets. For example, if a cloth dealer sells cloth, it will be termed as sales, but if the same
cloth dealer sells old furniture or typewriter, it will not be termed as sales. The term sales includes both
Cash and Credit sales.
Sales Return :--- Some customers might return the goods sold to them. These are termed as sales
returns or ‗return inwards‘.
Loss :-- The term conveys two different meanings. First, it conveys the result of the business for a
period when total expenses exceed the total revenues. For example, if revenues are Rs. 1,00,000 and
expenses are Rs. 1,20,000, the loss will be Rs. 20,000. Second, it refers to some fact or activity against
which firm receives no benefit. For example, loss due to fire, theft, accident etc. It may be noted that
losses differ from expenses. Expenses are incurred to generate revenues whereas losses do not. For
example, the theft of an asset is a loss but its depreciation is an expense.
Profit :--- It is the excess of total revenues over total expenses of a business enterprise for an accounting
period. Profit increases the investment of the owners.
Voucher :-- A voucher is a document which provides the authorization to pay and on the basis of which
the business transactions are, first of all, recorded in the books of accounts. A separate voucher is
prepared for each transaction and it specifies the accounts to be debited or credited. The form of a
voucher varies from firm to firm since vouchers are printed separately by different firms in their own
names. Vouchers are prepared by accountant and each voucher is numbered and countersigned by an
authorized person of the firm.
Discount :-- It is rebate or an allowance given by the seller to the buyer. It is of two types:
(i) Trade Discount :-- When discount is allowed by a seller to its customers at a fixed percentage on the list
or catalogue price of the goods it is called trade discount. It is not recorded in the books of accounts as it
is deducted in the invoice or cash memo itself from the gross value of goods.
(ii) Cash Discount :--- When discount is allowed to the customers for making prompt it is called cash
discount. For example, if a seller allows 2% discount for payment within a week it will be called cash
discount. It is always recorded in the books of accounts.
Drawing :--- Any cash or value of goods withdrawn by the owner for personal use or any private
payments made out of business funds are called drawings.
1.3 WORLD OF FINANCE
Economic growth and development of any country depends upon a well-knit financial system.
Financial System comprises a set of sub-system of financial institutions financial markets, financial
instruments and services which help in the formation of capital. It provides a mechanism by which
savings are transformed into investments. Thus, a financial system can be said to play a significant role
in the economic growth of a country by mobilizing the surplus funds and utilizing them effectively for
productive purposes.
The financial system is characterized by the presence of an integrated, organized and regulated
financial markets, and institutions that meet the short term and long term financial needs of both the
householders and corporate sector.
Financial Institutions the business organization dealing in the financial resources. They facilitate the
meeting of the investors and borrowers. Financial institutions provide the various services to investors
and borrowers, like investment opportunity, housing finance, venture capital, factoring, restructuring,
diversification, etc. They buy and sell financial instruments. Financial institutions are intermediaries
who facilitate smooth functioning of the financial system by making investors and buyers meet. They
mobilize savings of the surplus units and allocate them in productive activities promising a better rate of
return. It also provide services to entities (individuals, business, govt.) seeking advice on various issues
ranging from restructuring top diversification plans. Financial Institutions are also termed as financial
intermediaries because they act as middlemen between the savers and borrowers.
Types of Financial Institutions
Financial Institutions can be classified into two categories:
A. Banking Institutions
B. Non-Banking Financial Institutions
Banking Institutions
Reserve Bank of India is an apex institution which regulates, runs and supervises the banking
institutions in India. Banking Regulation Act, 1949 is the main legislation through which commercial
banks in India are governed. Banking institutions provide various financial services. These institutions
can broadly be divided in two categories:
1. Organized sector:- The organized banking sector in India is fairly developed and It is comprised of
commercial banks, co-operative banks and the regional rural banks.
Organized Sector
a) Commercial Banks
b) Co-operative banks
c) Regional Rural Banks(BPBs)
d) Foreign Banks
2. Unorganized sector:- The unorganized sector is consisted of Indigenous bankers, money lenders or
Sahukars or Seths etc. These persons are carrying out the function of banking in the unorganized
manner.
Unorganized Sector
a) Indigenous Bankers
b) Money Lenders
(Seths and Sahukars)
Non-Banking Institutions
The non-banking institutions may be broadly into two groups:--
a) Organized Financial Institutions
b) Unorganized Financial Institutions
The organized non-banking financial institutions include:
1. Development Finance Institutions:-- It includes:
a) The institutions like IDBI, IFCI, IIBI, IRDC at all India level.
b) State Finance Corporations (SFCs), State Industrial Development Corporations (SIDCs) at state level.
c) Agriculture Development Finance Institutions as NABARD, LDBS etc.
Development banks provide medium and long term finance to the corporate and industrial sector and
also take up promotional activities for economic development of the country.
2. Investment Institutions:-- It includes those financial institutions which mobilize savings of the public
at large through various schemes
And invest these funds in corporate and government securities. These include LIC, GIC,UTI, and
mutual funds.
Unorganized Financial Institutions
The unorganized non-banking financial include number of non-banking financial companies (NBFCs)
providing whole range of financial services. These include hire-purchase and consumer finance 
companies, leasing companies, housing finance companies, factoring companies, credit rating agencies,
merchant banking companies etc. NBFCs mobilize public funds and provide loan able funds. There has
been remarkable increase in the number of such companies since 1990‘s.
Non-Banking Financial Institutions
The NBCs raise their most of the funds in the form of Public Deposits. They accept the deposits for one
to five years maturity period. They provide a variety of funds/asset based/advisory services. These
institutions can be divided into two parts:
Venture Capital:- A new type of professional investors emerged in late 1960s whose specially was to
combine risk capital with entrepreneurial management. They also used advanced technology to launch
new products and companies in the market place. They are known as venture capitalists. It means the
term venture capital is an investment in a highly risky project with the objective of earning a high rate of
return. Venture capital is a risky money which is invested in risky enterprises either as equity or debt
capital.
Venture capital was originated in the USA in the late sixties. In India, a beginning was made in this
direction by setting up of venture capital divisions in ICICI, IDBI, AND IFCI, ICICI together with UTI
has established a separate company –Technology Development and Information Company of India –as a
venture capital company. The company‘s activities include venture capital financing, technology
information, consultancy as well as other services like marketing, business management, vendor
development etc.
IV. Bill Discounting:- Finance companies undertake this service. It is an attractive fund based activity.
The development of bill discounting as a financial service depends upon the existence of a bill market.
These bills are drawn by the drawer on the drawee for the value of goods delivered to him. In India,
banks mainly provide the funds for working capital required in the business through discounting of
commercial bills. Whereas in other countries, bill finance is one of the major types of finance provided
by banks.
According to the Indian Negotiable Instrument Act 1881, ― it is a written instrument containing an
unconditional order, signed by the maker, directing a certain person to pay a certain sum of money only
to, or to the order of, a certain person, or to the bearer of the instrument.
The bank purchases the bill payable on demand from the maker and credits his account with the amount
of bill less discount. At the maturity, the acceptor makes the payment to the bank when the bill is
presented for payment. In case of dishonor, the customer recovers the full amount from the maker. 
After the 1992 scam, RBI restricted the bill discounting services provided by banks. Now the RBI has
permitted banks to rediscount bill amongst themselves and with other financial institutions and finance
companies.
V. Housing Finance:-In India, the scope and need for the development of arrangement for supplying
loans for housing. Because housing is considered as one of the basic necessities of man and the capital
involved is so large that it is almost impossible and for middle and lower class to raise the required
money from their own resources. Till the end of 1980s, it remained and underdeveloped sector. But in
1988, the RBI established National Housing Bank. It initiated housing finance as a fund based activity.
NHB is an apex housing finance institution in India. Till now, many financial institutions and
companies in public, private and joint sectors have entered in this sector. Now the competition is so
large that every day we can notice a new scheme launched by someone to attract customer towards
itself.
VI. Insurance Services:- Insurance is a contract between the insurer and the insured where the insurer
gives an assurance to the person to pay him a certain sum of money in consideration of annual premium
, against a specified risk such as fire or compensate the beneficiaries on the happening of a specified
event such as accident or death. The written document between the two is called policy. The insurance
service are of two types :
(a) Life
(b)General
Until 1999, the LIC and GIC and its four subsidiaries were doing the insurance business in India. But
after 1999, this sector was thrown open for the private sector also. In 1999, Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority (IRDA)was also set up to monitor insurance business in India. The entrance of
the private sector in this field has increased the competition and forced two public sector giants to offer
new attractive policies to customers.
VII. Factoring:- Generally, the business transaction at wholesale level are made on credit. While at retail
level it takes place partly on the basis of cash and credit. Sellers allow some time to buyers to make
payments for the same. The due which arises during the process of credit are known as trade receivables
for sellers. Sometimes, sellers may require promissory notes or trade acceptances from buyers. The
sellers may make their own arrangements to collect receivables or they may hand over this job of
collecting receivables to a specialized collection agency. Such an agency is known as FACTOR.
Thus, FACTORING is a fund based financial service which provide resources to finance receivables as
well as the facility of collection receivables. Factoring may be on a resource basis or without recourse
basis. In a recourse basis, the risk of bad debts is borne by the client, whereas, in without recourse basis
the risk of credit is borne by the factor. In India, SBI Commercial and Factoring Services Ltd. Was set
up on 26th February, 1991 as the first factoring company. At present, SBI Factor and Commercial
Services Ltd. And CAN Bank Factors Ltd. Are working as factoring organizations in the country.
2) Fee Based/Advisory Services
I. Merchant Banking:- Merchant banks are known as ― accepting and issuing houses‖ in the England
and as ― investment banks‖ in the America. They are the issue houses which provide various services
related with the floatation of new ventures and new companies, preparation and execution of new
projects, consultancy and advice on the matters related with technical, financial, managerial and
organizational fields. 
The notification of the MINISTRY OF FINANCE defines a merchant bankers as,‖ Any person who is
engaged in the business of issue management either by making arrangements regarding selling, buying
or subscribing to securities as manager, consultant, advisor or corporate advisory service in relation to
such issue management.
Merchant banking was started in India in 1967 when the Grindlyas Bank received the licence from RBI.
SBI started merchant banking in 1972 followed by number of commercial banks. Development banks
like ICICI started this activity in 1973, followed by IFCI in 1986 and IDBI in 1991.
II. Stock Broking and Depository Services:- SEBI was set up by the Government in 1991 to ensure that
stock exchanges perform their self-regulatory role properly. Since then, stock broking become as a
professional advisory service. Stock broker is a member of stock exchange who deals in securities and
purchase and sell the securities on behalf of customers. Stock-broker has to get himself registered with
SEBI. SEBI has also issued various guidelines to regulate the working of the brokers. Brokers are
allowed to change commission on the buying and selling of securities.
The growth in the business of securities led to think for creating a new, modern infrastructure consisting
of depositories, paperless trading and computer recording of transactions. A beginning in this direction
was made by setting up of Stock Holding Corporation of India Ltd. (SHCIL) in August 1988. The
Government introduced the Ordinance for Depositories in September 1995 which was converted of new
and existing issues, implementation of delivery system, scrip hypothecation and implementation of
beneficial owner record-keeping. The National Stock Depository Ltd. (NSDL) was the first depository
in India which was started in 1996.
III. Credit Rating:- Credit rating is a grading service to investors which helps them in reducing their risk.
Credit rating may be considered as a science as well as an art. It may by considered as a science
because it involves a systematic approach to analyze the statistics with given formulas and as an art
because there are too many variables which are to be judged.
It is a technique in which relative ranking is provided to different instruments of a company on
the basis of systematic analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of them. This credit ranking is done on
the basis of analysis of financial statements, project analysis, credit worthiness factors and future
prospects of the concern project/company. Credit rating is not a recommendation to purchase or sell or
hold security. It is generally confined to debt instruments, but rating is also made for equity shares also.
In India, CRISIL, CARE, ICRA, DPCR, Fitch Ratings India Ltd. Are doing the credit rating of
industrial instruments/securities.
Conclusion
It may be concluded that the Indian Financial System has gone a variety of changes. To cope up with the fast
expanding industrial demand for funds, Indian financial system is passing through the re-emergence of private
financial institutions and strong structure of Indian financial institutions. Since the inception of the liberalization
and globalization, Indian financial system is undergoing major transformation. A noticeable development has
been the introduction of innovation in financial products. The corporate sector and financial institutions have
offered a variety of financial instruments or securities to cater the increasing demand of bonds.
