All types of organisations require financial management for its successful
operations. It contains components for the acquisition, management, allocation
and financing of resources for successful growth of an organisation. Every
organisation should manage its finances effectively in order to attain its mission
and goals. Recently, the fields of strategic management and financial
management combined together to evolve a new discipline namely Strategic
Financial Management.
Strategic Financial Management refers to the study of finance with a long
term perspective which takes into account the strategic goals of the enterprise.
Strategic Financial management is a management approach which makes use of
various financial tools and techniques in order to come up with a strategic
decision plan. It also ensures the implementation of the chosen strategy so as to
achieve the desired objectives.
The ultimate objective of strategic financial management is to identify the
best possible strategy which may result in maximisation of organisations market
value.Strategic financial management goes a step further in ensuring that the
organization remains on track to attain its short-term and long-term goals, while
maximizing value for its shareholders.
Strategic financial management is the identification of the possible
strategies capable of maximising an organisation’s market value and the
allocation of scarce capital resources among competing opportunities. It also
involves the implementation and monitoring of the chosen strategy so as to
achieve stated objectives.
Strategic financial management is managing an organization's financial
resources so as to achieve its business objectives and maximize its value.
Strategic financial management involves a defined sequence of steps that
encompasses the full range of a company's finances, from setting out objectives
and identifying resources, analyzing data and making financial decisions, to
tracking the variance between actual and budgeted results and identifying the
reasons for this variance. The term "strategic" means that this approach to
financial management has a long-term horizon.
School of distance education
Strategic Financial Management Page 6
The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants of UK [CIMA]
defines Strategic Financial Management as “the identification of the possible
strategies capable of maximising an organisation’s Net Present Value (NPV), the
allocation of scarce capital resources between competing opportunities and the
implementation and monitoring of the chosen strategy so as to achieve stated
objectives.
The important characteristics of Strategic financial Management are the
following:- 1. It is concerned with the long term management of fund with a strategic
perspective
2. It aims at maximisation of profit and wealth of the concern
3. It is both structured as well as flexible
4. It promotes growth, profitability and existence of the firm in the long run
and maximises shareholder value
5. It is an evolving and continuous process that constantly tries to adopt and
revise strategies in order to achieve strategic financial objectives of the
firm.
6. It involves innovative, creative and multidimensional approach for finding
solutions to the problems.
7. It helps to formulate appropriate strategies and facilitates constant
monitoring of action plans to match with the long term objectives.
8. It makes use of analytical financial techniques with qualitative and
quantitative judgement on factual information
9. It is result oriented combining of resources, especially of financial and
economic resources
10.Strategic financial management offers a number of solutions while
analysing the problems in the organisational context.
Strategic Financial Management helps in taking two broad financial decisions
taken by financial managers. They are
1. Decisions regarding investments in the assets of the company
2. Decisions regarding how such investments should be financed
FINANCIAL GOALS AND STRATEGY
Financial goal is a tangible focus for business mission and strategy.
Financial goals are deeply rooted in the company’s value and political
philosophy.Financial goals are so important that it becomes the supreme
responsibility of the managers at the higher level of the organisation. There are
many objectives which an organisation can pursue. It is generally accepted that
there should be one overall objective with all other objectives giving support so
that the overall objective can be achieved. For a business organisation, a financial
objective is generally taken as the overall objective.
Strategic Financial Management is concerned with procurement and use of
funds. It aims to use business funds in such a way that the firm’s value is
maximised. Strategic financial Management provides a framework for selecting a
proper course of action and deciding a viable commercial strategy. The main
objective of a business is to maximise the owner’s economic welfare. This
objective can be achieved by
1. Profit maximisation
2. Wealth maximisation
1. Profitmaximisation: It is the main aim of every economic activity.No business
can survive without earning profit. Profit is the measure of efficiency of the
business. Profit also serves as a protection against risks which cannot be insured.
Theaccumulated profits enable a business to face risks like fall in prices,
competition from other units, adverse government policies etc. Thus profit
maximisation is considered as the main objective of business.
The arguments in favour of profit maximisation are:- 1. When profit earning is the aim of the business then profit maximisation
should be the obvious objective
2. Profitability is a barometer for measuring efficiency and economic
prosperity of a business enterprise, thus, profit maximisation is justified
on the grounds of rationality
3. A business will be able to survive under unfavourable conditions, only
if it has some past earnings to rely upon.
4. Profits are the main sources of finance for the growth of a business.
So, a business should aim for profits for enabling its growth and development.
5. A firm pursuing profit maximisation also maximises socio-economic welfare.
Profit maximization typically is defined as a more static concept than shareholder
wealth maximization. The profit maximization objective from economic theory
does not normally consider the time dimension or the risk dimension in the
measurement of profits. In contrast, the shareholder wealth maximization
objective provides a convenient framework for evaluating both the timing and the
risks associated with various investment and financing strategies.
A closely held firm is more likely to be a wealth maximizer than a corporation
with wide ownership. In the closely held firm, the owners and the managers will
share the same objectives because the owners are the managers. In a widely-held
corporation, where the ownership and management functions are separate, it is
likely that managers may pursue objectives that are more self-serving than
owner-serving. Examples of alternative objectives that might be pursued in this
situation are extreme risk-averse behaviour, size maximization, satisficing, or
personal utility function maximization.
The arguments against Profit Maximisation concept are the following:- 1. The term profit is vague and it cannot be precisely defined. Even if, we take the
meaning of profits as earnings per share and maximise the earnings per share, it
does not necessarily mean increase in the market value of shares and the owner’s
economic welfare.
2. Profit maximisation objective ignores the time value of money and does not
consider the magnitude and timing of earnings. It treats all earnings as equal
though they occur in different periods.
3. It does not take into consideration the risk of the prospective earnings stream.
Two firms may have same expected earnings per share, but if the earnings stream
of one stream is more risky, then the market value of shares will be
comparatively less.
4. The effect of dividend policy on the market price of shares is also not considered
in the objective of profit maximisation.
Wealth maximisation is the appropriate objective of an enterprise. The goal of
shareholder wealth maximization is a long-term goal. Shareholder wealth is a
function of all the future returns to the shareholders. Hence, in making decisions
that maximize shareholder wealth, management must consider the long-run
impact on the firm and not just focus on short-run (i.e., current period) effects.
For example, a firm could increase short-run earnings and dividends by
eliminating all research and development expenditures. However, this decision
would reduce long-run earnings and dividends, and hence shareholder wealth,
because the firm would be unable to develop new products to produce and sell.
School of distance education
Strategic Financial Management Page 9
A stockholder’s current wealth in the firm is the product of the number of shares
owned, multiplied with the current stock price per share.
Stock holders current wealth in a firm =
Number of shares owned X Current stock price per share
While pursuing the objective of wealth maximisation, all efforts must be put
in for maximising the current present value of any particular course of action.
Every financial decision should be based on cost benefit analysis. If the benefit is
more than the cost, the decision will help in maximising the wealth and if vice
versa will not be serving the purpose of wealth maximisation.
There is a rationale in applying wealth maximising policy as an operating
financial management policy because of the following reasons.
1. It serves the interests of suppliers of loaned capital, employees, management and
society.
2. It is consistent with the objective of owners’ economic welfare.
3. The objective of wealth maximisation implies long run survival and growth of the
firm.
4. It takes into consideration the risk factor and time value of money as the current
present value of any particular course of action is measured.
5. The effect of dividend policy on market price of shares is also considered as the
decisions are taken to increase the market value of the shares.
6. The goal of wealth maximisation leads towards maximising stockholder’s utility
or value maximisation of equity shareholders through increase in stock price per
share.
The wealth maximisation objective has been criticised by certain financial
theorists on the following grounds:- 1. It is only a prescriptive idea.
2. It is not socially desirable
3. It is not clear whether this concept include maximising owners wealth or wealth
of the firm which includes claim holders such as debenture holders, preferred
stock holders etc.
4. The objective of wealth maximisation is a problem when ownership and
management are separated. When managers act as agents of the real owners,
there is possibility fora conflict of interest between shareholders and managerial
interests.MEASURING SHAREHOLDERS VALUE CREATION: EVA AND MVA
The two new measures used to determine whether an investment positively
contributes to the share holder wealth are:- 1. Economic Value Added [EVA]
2. Market Value Added [MVA]
1. Economic Value Added [EVA]
Economic value added (EVA) is a measure of a company's financial
performance based on the residual wealth calculated by deducting its cost of
capital from its operating profit, adjusted for taxes on a cash basis. EVA can also
be referred to as economic profit, and it attempts to capture the true economic
profit of a company. This measure was devised by Stern Stewart and Co.
EVA is an internal management performance measure that compares Net
Operating Profit to Total Cost of Capital. It is used as an indicator of how
profitable company projects are and it therefore serves as a reflection of
management performance. Businesses are only truly profitable when they create
wealth for their shareholders, and the measure of this goes beyond calculating
Net Income.
EVA is the incremental difference in the rate of return over a company's
cost of capital. Essentially, it is used to measure the value a company generates
from funds invested into it. If a company's EVA is negative, it means the
company is not generating value from the funds invested into the business.
Conversely, a positive EVA shows a company is producing value from the funds
invested in it.
Modern investors are demanding shareholder value more strongly than
ever. The financial theory suggested that every company’s ultimate aim is to
maximise the wealth of its shareholders. This is quite natural since shareholders
own the company and as rational investors expect good long term return on their
investment. EVA aims to tell what has happened to the wealth of the
shareholders. EVA is based on the concept that earning a return greater than the
cost of capital increases value of a company, and earning less destroys value.
Calculating EVA
The formula for calculating EVA is:
EVA = Net Operating Profit after Taxes (NOPAT)–
School of distance education
Strategic Financial Management Page 11
Invested Capital X Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC)
The equation above shows there are three key components to a company's
EVA: NOPAT, the amount of capital invested and the WACC. NOPAT can be
calculated manually but is normally listed in a public company's financials.
Capital invested is the amount of money used to fund a specific project. WACC
is the average rate of return a company expects to pay its investors; the weights
are derived as a fraction of each financial source in a company's capital structure. WACC can also be calculated but is normally provided as public record. It is
calculated as
WACC = [Cost of Equity x proportion of equity fromcapital + Cost of debt
x proportion of debt from capital x [1-tax rate]
Or
EVA = NOPAT – CAPITAL COST
NOPAT = PBIT [1-T] = PAT + INT [1-T]
OR
EVA = [RATE OF RETURN – COST OF CAPITAL] X CAPITAL
The goal of EVA is to quantify the charge, or cost, for investing capital
into a certain project, and then assess whether it is generating enough cash to be
considered a good investment. The charge represents the minimum return that
investors require to make their investment worthwhile. A positive EVA shows a
project is generating returns in excess of the required minimum return.
The Benefits of EVA
The purpose of EVA is to assess company and management performance.
EVA champions the idea a business is only profitable when it creates wealth and
returns for shareholders, and requires performance above a company's cost of
capital.
