there are companies with shareholders, and banks and stock exchanges; and there are still plenty of
lawyers and bankers who help to transfer money from one
pocket to another so that companies can raise the finance they
need and business may be done. But the way the money is
raised and the speed with which it is done have changed virtually beyond recognition. Thirty years ago, banks were still the
main source of finance for most big companies, especially in
Japan and continental Europe.
Today, for the most part, banks play second fiddle to the
equity and bond markets for big companies; even in Germany
and Japan, the part played by banks has diminished. Equity and
bond markets have become more international and have extended their influence in ways that would have been unimaginable 30 years ago.
Compared with their counterparts of even a decade ago,
today’s financial institutions are not only more diverse, both
geographically and in terms of their businesses, they are also
better capitalised. In 1990, the biggest financial firms were commercial banks, most of them Japanese, whose main function
was the taking of deposits and the making of loans. At that time,
banks in continental Europe were typically engaged in a
broader range of activities than their US counterparts which,
under the Glass-Steagall Act, since repealed, had to choose
between commercial banking, investment banking and specialist financial services such as insurance.
Nowadays, by far the largest firms are financial-services conglomerates. These combine commercial banking with a range of
other financial services, such as underwriting bond and equity
issues and advising on mergers and acquisitions. They also
provide consumer finance and sell on loans to other investors,
for example, by arranging syndicates, buying and selling derivatives, and issuing securities backed by mortgages, credit-card receivables and the like. In 1990, the list of the top 15 financial
1
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 1
firms by market capitalisation (as compiled by Morgan Stanley
Capital International) was dominated by Japanese banks, the
largest of which had a stockmarket capitalisation of $57 billion.
A decade later, partly because of a spate of mergers among such
firms, international financial-services groups took up most of
the places; and the biggest (Citigroup) was then capitalised at
more than $250 billion.
The sheer size of the conglomerates has undoubtedly helped
them to withstand the shocks that have beset the banking
system since the dotcom boom turned to bust and stockmarkets
began to slide. Between 1998 and 2001, according to the Federal
Reserve, America’s central bank, telecommunications firms
worldwide alone borrowed around $1 trillion. Many of these
loans have since had to be written off because their borrowers
went bankrupt. In quick succession in the United States, Enron,
WorldCom, Global Crossing and others collapsed. Yet in
contrast to previous setbacks following similar bouts of
overexuberance and overinvestment, banks were able to continue lending to companies that needed money. The growth of
sophisticated debt markets also helped to reduce companies’ reliance on bank credit and equity to finance their operations. As
a result, the US economy in particular was able to maintain a
faster pace of growth than many had feared.
That J.P. Morgan Chase was able to absorb the billions of
dollars in losses that resulted from the collapse at the end of
2001 of Enron, an energy-trading company, speaks volumes not
just about the size of J.P. Morgan Chase’s balance sheet, but also
about its ability to spread the risk by selling derivatives to other
investors. In the 1980s, a loss on the scale of Enron, then one of
the world’s biggest companies, might have toppled Texas’s
banking system. In the event, Texas was spared by the deregulation of state banking laws that subsequently took place, which
allowed J.P. Morgan Chase (itself an amalgam of two big
banking groups) to buy Texas Commerce Bank, one of Enron’s
biggest lenders.
It is true that banks have successfully shifted a large proportion of their risk on to others, and this has helped them to withstand a welter of shocks internationally. But are banks really as
adept at diversifying this risk as they like to think? Are those to
2 ESSENTIAL FINANCE
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 2
whom they are passing the risk capable of managing it, particularly if markets remain volatile? In short, could the shift from a
system reliant on banks to one based largely on markets contain
dangers of its own?
Insurers at risk
One worry is that insurance companies – not always the most
sophisticated of investors – have taken on part of the risk that
banks and other intermediaries in the financial markets are
shedding. Swiss Re and Munich Re, two of the world’s biggest
insurers, between them account for a large proportion of credit
derivatives outstanding. Credit derivatives are securities that
allow banks to pass on to other investors the risk that some of
their borrowers will default. Insurance companies have also
been big buyers of asset-backed securities, financial instruments
backed by pools of loans and other forms of debt. If insurance
companies were unable to meet their liabilities and went bust,
there is a danger that the problems would rebound on the
banks.
Another worry is that, with fewer and larger international
banks, the pressure to succeed on even the best-managed banks
may reach a point where they make mistakes on a colossal
scale. Consolidation also brings dangers of its own. Take the
foreign-exchange markets. In 1995, 20 banks in the United States
accounted for 75% of foreign exchange traded; six years later,
the number was down to 13. Liquidity, argue some, is a function
not just of the size of the market but also of the diversity of
opinion of those trading within it. Moreover, financial institutions increasingly use the same models for assessing and managing risk. So when one decides to move, generally they all
move. As the deals become bigger and the stakes higher, observers worry that a sudden loss of liquidity or a shock on the
scale of the terrorist attacks of September 11th 2001 could cause
a black hole to open up. If it does, the risk is that even sound
companies could be sucked into it.
There have already been a few close calls. From 1997,
commercial banks have been permitted to use so-called valueat-risk (var) models to calculate the amount of capital they are
THE CHANGING FACE OF MARKETS 3
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 3
required to hold under the Basel rules on liquidity, so-called
because they were devised by the Bank for International Settlements, which has its headquarters in Basel. Drawn up by the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, a body that includes
representatives from the world’s main central banks, the new
rules were designed to make banks more sensitive to market
risk while at the same time giving them greater flexibility in
running their businesses.
The new system did not have to wait long for its first test. In
1998, the financial markets were jolted first by Russia’s decision
to default on its external debt, and then by the near collapse of
Long Term Capital Management (ltcm), a US hedge fund
which included two Nobel Prize winners among its directors as
well as heavyweights on Wall Street. Hedge funds are largely
unregulated investment funds that take big (and risky) positions
in the financial markets, often on exchange or interest rates. In
this case, ltcm bet wrongly that the prices of certain securities
would move closer together; instead, they drifted apart. Required to put up more money by the institutions with which it
had contracts, the fund became overstretched and eventually
had to be bailed out by a group of banks gathered together by
the Federal Reserve.
Some observers fret that regulations based on var models
contribute to the volatility of financial markets by leading to a
vicious circle, in which traders are forced to reduce their positions in the market in order to put up fresh money, which puts
renewed pressure on prices, and so on. In other words, the var
rules make an old problem worse by forcing participants to get
out of the market when they can least afford to, and by forcing
banks to reduce their lending when borrowers most need it.
Two recent studies suggest that these fears may be exaggerated. The first, by Philippe Jorion, a professor of finance at the
University of California, found that financial markets have
been no more volatile since the introduction of derivatives.
Moreover, says Jorion, var rules should not be viewed as a
panacea for market ills. “They provide no guarantee that market
losses will not occur,” he says. Indeed, there is evidence that, far
from exacerbating a fall in prices, derivatives help to stabilise
markets by spreading risk. The second study, by Alain Chaboud
4 ESSENTIAL FINANCE
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 4
and Steven Weinberg of the US Federal Reserve, looked at the
foreign-exchange markets. It found no evidence that electronic
trading and the growing use of derivatives had made the
markets more volatile, or that liquidity had been drained away
from them because of the growing use of electronic trading. So
far, so good. The study did concede, however, that the use of
trading platforms that connect the ultimate customer more directly with the dealer in foreign exchange, reducing still further
the role of intermediaries, may bring more volatility.
If so, the stakes are high. Until the Bretton Woods agreement,
a post-war attempt to stabilise international finance, was dismantled in the early 1970s, fixed exchange rates were the norm.
Today it is hard to think of a developed country that does not
allow its exchange rate to float or, as with the euro, is linked to
one that does. At the touch of a keypad, trillions of dollarsworth of foreign currencies routinely change hands every day,
much of it in the form of obligations traded as derivatives.
Thirty years ago, markets of this size and scope would have
been unimaginable. In the days of fixed exchange rates, the
market for foreign exchange was a servant of trade, easing the
exchange of goods across borders. Today, as services become
more important in international trade, the value of foreign currencies changing hands each day far exceeds the value of the
goods being shipped from producer to user.
The first truly electronic services for dealing in foreign exchange were launched by Reuters in the early 1980s. The first
systems allowed brokers to communicate directly, but did not
simultaneously match different counterparties, as had been
done over the telephone. That came in the early 1990s, when
Reuters launched a version which automatically matched buy
and sell orders from anonymous dealers. Nowadays, dealers exchange over $4 trillion-worth of foreign currency a day, the bulk
of it over two electronic systems. One concentrates on transactions in dollars and Japanese yen, the other on sterling, the euro
and the currencies of emerging markets.
International equity
Stockmarkets have also been undergoing dramatic change, most
THE CHANGING FACE OF MARKETS 5
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 5
of which has involved becoming more international. In 1999, at
least one out of every six deals done on stockmarkets involved
a foreign buyer or seller – a far cry from the situation not much
more than a decade ago. In the mid-1980s, Salomon Brothers, an
investment bank, estimated that 99% of the world’s trading in
equities was done on the exchange where the shares had their
primary listing. Of course, a proportion of those who bought
and sold shares then were foreign investors, but the number has
since grown substantially.
The New York Stock Exchange (nyse), still the world’s
biggest, led the way towards a more international world. It did
this through the introduction of American Depositary Receipts
(adrs), which enabled domestic investors to buy the shares of
foreign companies with US dollars, and later by attracting a
growing number of foreign companies to list their shares on the
exchange. But the prize for internationalism must go to the
London Stock Exchange. According to figures compiled by the
World Federation of Exchanges, London accounted for more
than half of the worldwide trade in foreign equities in 2002,
compared with a combined share of 25% for the nyse and
nasdaq, America’s main exchange for trading in the shares of
technology companies.
London is also the international centre for another market
that has mushroomed over the years: the derivatives market.
Derivatives are financial instruments that are “derived” from
another, for example, an option to buy a Treasury bond. The
value of the option depends on the performance of the underlying instrument, in this case a Treasury bond. This can be
taken a stage further: for example, an option on a futures contract. The value of the option depends on the price of the
futures contract, which, in turn, will vary with the value of the
underlying instrument.
Although the term derivative was little used until the 1980s,
the practice of trading forward (which is what a derivative
does) to mitigate the effects of risk has been a part of dealing in
physical commodities for centuries. It has been claimed that
forward trading began in Roman times, that Japanese rice
traders first exchanged contracts for future delivery in the 17th
century and that its origins can be traced back to Amsterdam
6 ESSENTIAL FINANCE
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 6
and London’s Royal Exchange a century earlier. Whatever the
truth, it is beyond dispute that, in 1865, the Chicago Board of
Trade shaped the first grain futures contract. Thirteen years
later, the London Metal Exchange and the London Corn Trade
Association followed with their own futures contracts. Such
contracts were developed to protect traders from unknown but
expected risks in the future: in the case of grain, the vagaries of
the weather and an uncertain transport system.
During the past decade or so, the growth of trading in derivatives on organised exchanges has been brisk. Fastest growing
have been derivatives of financial instruments tied to currencies
and exchange rates, interest rates and equities. Since 1995 alone,
the number of contracts of this kind traded on exchanges worldwide has increased two and a half times. Despite increases in
other markets, particularly in South Korea, US exchanges still
account for the lion’s share of the business, around 35% of all
contracts traded. Together, European exchanges are not far
behind. 
Yet even growth on this scale is dwarfed by the speed with
which trading of financial instruments over the counter (otc),
that is, directly between institutions, has galloped ahead. According to the Bank for International Settlements, which tracks
such things, in 2001 the average daily turnover of otc trading
in derivatives worldwide was more than $760 billion, five times
the level of trading on recognised exchanges throughout the
world. Of this, about one-third was centred on London, the
leader by far in otc trading of this kind.
One reason for the growth in otc trading is the surge in
demand for interest-rate products of one sort or another. The
repayment of US government debt during the Clinton administration reduced the liquidity of long-term government bonds,
forcing banks and other financial institutions to look for other
ways of hedging their risks in the financial markets. Interestrate derivatives, in particular swaps traded directly between
banks and other institutions, seemed to fit the bill. Swaps are
transactions in which two parties (say, a bank and a securities
THE CHANGING FACE OF MARKETS 7
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 7
house) exchange financial assets and the interest payments
due on them, the idea being, of course, that both parties should
benefit from the transaction. In the case of an interest-rate
swap, a borrower who has raised, say, Swiss francs will exchange the interest payments on the loan with those of another
borrower who may have raised, for example, dollars.
Another influence on otc trading was the introduction of
the euro, the new currency that came into circulation in 12 European countries at the beginning of 2002, replacing old stalwarts such as the Deutschemark, French franc, Italian lira and
Spanish peseta. Financial institutions began trading in notional
euros in 1999, and euro-denominated swaps quickly became a
new benchmark for buyers and sellers of fixed-income instruments throughout Europe as the market for corporate debt in
euros developed.
With much of their currency and interest-rate risk eliminated
by the introduction of the euro, financial institutions needed a
tool with which to reduce the remaining credit risk (the chance
that borrowers might renege on their debts). Credit derivatives –
a way of laying off risk to other investors until the loan matures
– became just such an instrument. Turnover in credit derivatives
remains small compared with that of interest-rate contracts, but
it is growing fast. The British Bankers’ Association reckons that
in early 2002 London accounted for around half the expanding
activity in credit derivatives, and that the market had increased
no less than eight times since 1997.
At the heart of any market is the free flow of information,
which is why, according to Alan Greenspan, veteran chairman
of the Federal Reserve, credit derivatives have proved so successful. They not only allow bank treasurers to lay off part of
their risk, by reflecting the probability of default in the price;
they also make the jobs of banks’ loan officers a lot easier. In the
past, banks relied largely on their own credit analysis (together
with what market information they could glean) to tell them
whether a borrower was likely to default. Since the advent of
credit derivatives, they have been able to judge from the price
of a derivative the probability of a net loss in the underlying
loan.
But what about the dangers to those, such as insurance com8 ESSENTIAL FINANCE
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 8
panies, which pick up the risks? Some insurers promised guaranteed returns to their customers during the boom years of the
1990s, only to find that, because falling stockmarkets had
reduced the value of their assets and depleted their reserves,
they were unable to fulfil their promises. To make up the
income they have lost, insurers have been big buyers of credit
derivatives and asset-backed securities, which have a higher
yield and so are often riskier than other investments.
Observers fret that the banking system may be storing up
problems for itself through the wholesale transfer of risk to insurers and other investors. Indeed, some insurance companies
are owned by banks. A number of Japanese insurers have gone
bust in recent years because they were unable to meet guaranteed payments to their policyholders, and others have not been
allowed to go bust because of the threat it would pose to the
banking system. Because of falling stockmarkets, many more insurers around the world have been forced to increase penalties
to savers for withdrawing their money, thus helping to shore up
their own balance sheets.
Insurance companies are carrying another burden too.
During the boom years of the 1990s many insurers, particularly
life companies, relied too heavily on equities. Many UK insurers
held as much as four-fifths of their assets in shares, or at one
point about 20% of all domestic equities traded on the London
stockmarket. When the markets began to slide, the companies
were forced to sell. After a while, the sales become self-fulfilling.
The more equities tumble in value, the more the insurance companies have to sell in order to meet the levels of free capital demanded by regulators. Regulators have already had to be
lenient in the way they apply their rules.
Back-scratching
It is not surprising that greater internationalisation has encouraged demands for closer co-operation between regulators in different countries and in different industries. It is an irony that a
country with one of the most sophisticated financial systems,
the United States, also has one of the most fragmented systems
of regulation. While other countries moved during the late
THE CHANGING FACE OF MARKETS 9
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 9
1990s to reduce the number of regulatory bodies – the UK, for
example, has a single omnipotent Financial Services Authority –
the United States has been reluctant to tamper with the jurisdictions held by such bodies as the Federal Reserve, the Securities
and Exchange Commission (sec) and the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission. As a result, duplication among agencies
abounds.
Nevertheless, there is little doubt that regulators, particularly
those that preside over the world’s most sophisticated financial
centres, are now co-operating much more than they used to
even a decade ago. Although no single regulator oversees the
giants of international finance (nor perhaps is one ever likely to),
such firms are watched closely wherever they trade in the developed world. The key to effective regulation and smoothrunning financial markets is transparency as well as the free
flow of information.
One hope is that the improved regulation of banks will
provide early warning of dangers. Under the Basel rules of the
1980s, banks have had to link the amount of capital they must
hold to the level of risk carried by the loans they make. This
sounds fine in principle but does not always work in practice.
Critics claim that the system is too crude: banks have to set aside
as much capital for a loan to General Electric as they do to a
hotelier in Poland. Basel 2, a more sophisticated version of the
rules, is being drawn up by the central banks of the developed
world. It would cover many more banks worldwide. Yet central
bankers have found it difficult to agree on the scope of the new
rules and how they should be applied. For example, some want
more leeway for banks lending mainly to small businesses
because, in theory, the risks are fewer. Originally planned for
2004, the introduction of Basel 2, as the new rules are known,
has been delayed until 2006, and even that may be in doubt.
Better regulation of banks may reduce the chances of a collapse in the financial system, but should regulators also be
thinking about ways of preventing the investment bubbles that
lead to capital being misallocated in the first place? Until the
dotcom bubble burst, the answer was invariably no. Advocates
of efficient market theory argued that the system was inherently self-correcting. In efficient markets, prices are assumed to
10 ESSENTIAL FINANCE
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 10
reflect fundamental values and to price in all available information. If ill-informed investors move prices away from their true
value, informed ones will simply arbitrage them back again.
Purists believe that if share prices rise to a level for which
there is no obvious explanation, then investors will conclude
that there is another less obvious explanation, such as the dawn
of a new age of productivity or, as dotcom enthusiasts believed
at the time, a “new economic paradigm”. What believers will
not conclude, at least until after it has burst, is that a bubble
exists – which, of course, is both irrational and inefficient.
Many observers would like to see the Federal Reserve and
other central banks attempt to control not just the level of inflation, their main preoccupation, but asset prices too. They argue
that the costs of pricking an inflating bubble – possibly recession, deflation or sometimes a combination of the two – outweigh the risks of raising interest rates pre-emptively to prevent
a bubble forming. After all, argue interventionists, history is littered with examples of the results of inaction on the part of
central banks that have resulted in problems of a comparable
magnitude; for example, Japan’s prolonged period of economic
stagnation and occasional deflation following the bursting of its
own asset-price bubble in the early 1990s.
The danger, of course, is that when a bubble does burst, its
impact can be far-reaching, not just on the financial markets but
also on the underlying economy. The wealth effect, which helps
to boost consumers’ confidence and so propel share prices ever
higher when markets are rising, also works in reverse. Equally
damaging can be the sudden loss of confidence produced by a
realisation on the part of investors, particularly private ones,
that they have been duped.
Revelations in 2002 by Eliot Spitzer, the crusading attorneygeneral of New York State, that investment banks on Wall Street
had routinely touted shares in public which they privately believed to have been “junk” had a predictable result. Aggrieved
that they had been misled when they bought the shares of companies seeking initial public offerings during the heady days of
the technology boom, investors called their lawyers and sued. It
was not so much the knowledge that investment banks suffered
from conflicts of interest – Wall Street has long had to balance
THE CHANGING FACE OF MARKETS 11
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 11
its own interests with those of its clients – but the blatant way
in which the abuses had occurred.
The revelations cast doubt not just on the legitimacy of
Chinese walls, the ability of investment banks to separate one
function from another and therefore the interests of different
clients, but also on the role of the securities analyst, the individual whose job it is to analyse the businesses of individual companies and to put a value on their shares. For years investors
had taken what analysts write with a pinch of salt because,
after all, they are often part of investment-banking teams that
advise companies on (lucrative) acquisitions, mergers and the
like. But the degree to which investment research had become
the handmaiden of investment banking shocked many of them.
Investors were also surprised by the extent to which the directors of big companies had been handed perks (often by giving
them priority in share issues that they could later sell at a hefty
profit) in return for investment-banking mandates and other advisory work.
If nothing else, the greater degree of transparency that has been
forced on companies, banks and the markets on which they
both rely will provide additional safeguards for investors.
Many were surprised by the failure of credit-rating agencies to
spot the problems at Enron, WorldCom and others before they
went bust. Such lapses raised questions about the agencies’
roles in the credit markets. Their main business is rating the
creditworthiness of bonds issued in the debt markets, but in the
1990s, like auditors before them, they started to stray into other,
more lucrative forms of consultancy. Where did the rating agencies get their information from, how was it analysed, and are
their opinions worth the paper they were then written on, asked
Congress.
The loss of confidence resulting from the slew of corporate
failures not only contributed to the demise of Andersen, then
one of the world’s oldest accounting firms. It also led to the
passing of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act by Congress in 2002, an
attempt to bolster standards of corporate governance in the
United States and one of the toughest pieces of securities legislation to be enacted since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
Wisely, Congress let the sec, the main US regulator of securities
markets, enforce the rules. Among other things, the act imposed
an independent regulator on the auditing profession, in the
form of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. It
also banned auditors from doing some non-audit work for audit
clients, thus preventing them from accepting certain types of
lucrative consultancy work that might conflict with their responsibilities as auditors.
Enron was brought down by the shifting of liabilities to offbalance-sheet “special-purpose vehicles”, whose existence was
not disclosed to shareholders. To guard against similar abuses in
future, the act requires public companies to provide details of
THE CHANGING FACE OF MARKETS 13
01 Essential Finance 10/11/06 2:21 PM Page 13
all such entities above a certain threshold. It also tightened up
the rules governing when senior executives of public companies may buy and sell shares (many directors had cashed in
their options ahead of bad news, which depressed the share
price); and it curtailed the use of pro-forma accounts, which
exclude several inconvenient things, such as the cost of mergers,
and so massage profits.
To curb the power of chief executives, who until then had
reigned supreme over most public companies in the United
States (partly because they invariably combine their role with
that of chairman), the nyse followed up with several measures
of its own, aimed at giving shareholders more control over the
companies they own. For example, all boards of companies
quoted on the nyse have to have a majority of independent
members. This excludes almost anyone who has a business link
with the company, from suppliers to lawyers, bankers and consultants. A better answer in the long run might be to adopt the
practice long favoured by most big companies in the UK: to split
the roles of chief executive and chairman.