"Health" is a state of complete physical, social and mental well being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity. Health is thus a level of functional efficiency of living beings and a general condition of a persons mind, body and spirit, meaning it is free from illness, injury and pain. It is a resource of everyday life and a positive concept emphasizing physical capabilities.

Good health is a secret of every happy man. There is an old saying, 'Health is Wealth'. Staying healthy for children is vital for proper growth and development of mind and body as they need to focus in the class and fully participate in the activities on the field. Parents must take their children for medical check-up and learn from experts about their development in terms of height and weight, as it has a huge impact on their overall performance and efficiency. If you are strong and healthy, you can be a shining example to others and teach them how to achieve vibrant health.

Good health is a matter of great concern, to maintain it, healthy living and a disciplined life is a must. One of the best ways is to drink plenty of water as it reduces the risk of infection, keeps your skin healthy, reduces the risk of heart attack, burns body fat and regulates our body temperature. We should sleep well as it relaxes our body and reduces stress. We need to have a balanced diet and go for long, brisk walks. Our motto should be to keep our body clean in order to remain healthy. We must laugh more as laughing is a therapy and a secret of good health. The government should include integrated health programs into their public policies and control specific health problems. 
The world is going through rapid changes, and the only constant thing that is in our hands is our health. Being healthy is a choice. Specific guidelines are there to maintain good health, but in the end, it is individual effort and determination. Good health is essential for having a pro-active and fully functioning life. Man is a social animal, and good health ensures social survival. Health, besides being personal, is also social. A healthy person can bring positive changes in society. It is not an end to itself but also the key to creating a better and more reformed community.


 
Health can be of varied types; physical, emotional, mental, social, spiritual, and sexual health is some of them. Distress can cause neurotic disorders, and healthy people are less likely to fall prey to them. Physical health refers to the bodily well-being of individuals. It involves maintaining a healthy lifestyle. An individual who follows a balanced diet, replenished with carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, and minerals, in adequate quantities, usually has better immunity. Health is Wealth means good health is the real treasure. A healthy life enables one to remain positive and face all life challenges.

Physical health requires few dedicated efforts, including regular exercise and consumption of a lot of water. Water regulates all our body processes, reduces chances for zits and pimples, and ensures regular bowel movements. Exercises like brisk walking, running, cycling, and skipping help in maintaining proper body weight.


 
Even if an individual has specific issues like heart diseases, he must know the required guidelines. The guidelines involve not eating very oily food, avoiding junk food, and so on. A diabetic person must adhere to the doctor’s instructions and consume minimum sugar. Children should eat more proteins as they are body-building nutrients. Physical health is essential for a long and pleasant lifespan.

Mental health refers to our emotional and psychological well-being. Mental health has a significant impact on our thoughts, behaviors, and attitude. It is essential to give equal attention to our mental health as its effects are grave. Society has a significant impact on an individual’s mental health. Societal pressures about getting jobs and getting significantly married affect our peace of mind. In addition to false standards of beauty imposed on us, harmful and hurtful remarks regarding someone’s body and various unnecessary criticisms take a toll on our mental health.


 
Teenagers are very susceptible to depression and anxiety as they go through the troubled adolescent period. Adults expect them to take up responsibilities all of a sudden, and they cannot cope up with their expectations. Hence, they suffer from an identity crisis as they cannot comprehend the roles that they should play.

Adolescents often fall under peer pressure and take to bad habits like drugs, alcohol, which makes them unfocused. Retired individuals also suffer from loneliness and depression as they feel that they have lost their prominence in the family. Heavy workload and pressure to meet deadlines, merged with an unhealthy workplace environment may also affect mental health.

It is essential to create a positive environment around yourself to counter the negativity. Cutting off toxic people is the right way of having better mental health. Above everything, we must choose happiness and optimism as the guiding principles of our life.