Health is that balanced condition of the living organism in which the integral, harmonious performance of the vital functions tends to the preservation of the organism and the normal development of the individual. The health of individual people and their communities are affected by a wide range of contributory factors. People’s good or bad health is determined by their environment and situations.

Generally, the context in which an individual lives is of great importance for both his health status and quality of their life. It is increasingly recognized that health is maintained and improved not only through the advancement and application of health science, but also through the efforts and intelligent lifestyle choices of the individual and society.

According to the World Health Organization, the main determinants of health include the social and economic environment, the physical environment, and the person’s individual characteristics and behaviors.

The maintenance and promotion of health is achieved through different combination of physical, mental, and social well-being, together sometimes referred to as the “health triangle.”

Socio Economic Status:

The higher a person’s socioeconomic status is, the more likely he/ she is to enjoy good health. Socioeconomic status affects all members of the family, including newborn babies.

Education:

People with lower levels of education generally have a higher risk of experiencing poorer health. Their levels of stress will most likely be higher, compared to people with higher academic qualifications.

Physical Environment:

If your water is clean and safe, the air you breathe is pure, your workplace is healthy, your house is comfortable and safe, you are more likely to enjoy good health compared to somebody whose water supply is not clean and safe, the air they breathes is contaminated, the workplace is unhealthy, etc.

Culture:

The traditions and customs of a society and how a family responds to them play an important role in people’s health. The impact could be either good or bad for health. The determinants of culture influence the health of individuals’ are- ethnicity, language, religion and spiritual beliefs, gender, socio-economic class, age, sexual orientation, geographic origin, education, upbringing life experience.

Genetic Inheritance:

People’s longevity, general health, and propensity to certain diseases are partly determined by their genetic makeup.

Working Conditions:

Statistics shows that employed are more likely to enjoy better health than people who are unemployed. If you have some control over your working conditions your health will benefit too.

Access and Use of Health Services:

A society that has access and uses good quality health services is more likely to enjoy better health than one that doesn’t. For example, developed countries that have universal health care services have longer life expectancies for their people compared to developed countries that don’t.

Gender:

Men and women are susceptible to some different diseases, conditions and physical experiences, which play a role in the general health.

Disease:

The term disease broadly refers to any condition that impairs the normal functioning of the body. A disease is a particular abnormal condition, a disorder that affects part or all of an organism.


4. Essay on the Effects of Emotions on Health:
Inadequate emotional expression especially of negative feelings can have an adverse effect on the progres­sion of certain types of illness, such as cancer. People who tend to experience negative emotions and who also inhibit self-expression in their social interactions are exhibiting a pattern of behavior recently termed the Type D—for distressed personality type.

Individuals who cope with stress by keeping their negative emotions to themselves are likely to experience suppressed immune systems, greater recurrence of cancer, and higher mor­tality rates. In contrast, patients who demonstrate positive affect, especially joy, well-being, and happiness—increase the likelihood of recovery.

An intriguing finding is the relation between expression of distress and treatment outcome. Open expression of negative affect and a willingness to fight illness are sometimes associated with greater immune function, decreased recurrence rates, and increased survival time, even among patients at advanced stages of cancer. For example, combative individuals, those who express anger about getting cancer and hostility towards their doctors and family members—often live longer than patients who passively accept their fate and quietly undergo treatment.

Emotion can also play a role in the progression of hypertension, or high blood pressure, a condition in which the pressure within the blood vessels is abnormally high. Prolonged hypertension, when untreated, can result in extensive damage to the entire circulatory system. Indeed, about 30 percent of cardiovascular disease deaths each year are attributable to hypertension. Some evidence suggests that emotional stressors can affect the regulation of blood pressure through neuro-hormonal mechanisms.

For example, anxiety and hostility can increase general arousal and facili­tate the release of catecholamine a class of neurotransmitters that play an important role in the sympathetic nervous system. The release of the catecholamine epinephrine has the effect of boosting a person’s overall readi­ness to act; a rise in blood pressure is part of this overall readiness.

Although the effects of emotional stressors are usually brief, extreme reactivity to anxiety, hostility, and anger may indicate a predisposition to develop hyper­tension. Not surprisingly, the strongest relations between emotions and blood pressure have been found for unexpressed anger and hostility. Fortunately, research has shown that people can learn to reduce such tendencies.

In one study, Gidron and Davidson (1996) identified a group of participants who scored high on measures of cynical hostility, the harmful component of the Type A behavior pattern. Half of these persons were assigned to an eight-week inter­vention specifically designed to modify cynical hostility; the other half (the control group) received information about the link between hostility and heart disease and about ways to reduce hostility.

Participants assigned to the intervention condition attended weekly meetings, monitored their hostility daily, and received instruction in the use of specific coping skills; for example, they learned to use relaxation exercises and practiced ways to vent their angry feelings. The participants in the intervention group showed significant improvement on measures of cynical hostility, whereas participants assigned to the control group did not.