(i) Large number of medical and paramedical staff has been taken on contract to augment the human resources. During the year 2009-10, about 2475 MBBS doc­tors, 160 specialists, 7136 ANMs, 2847 staff nurses, 2368 AYUSH doctors and 2184 AYUSH paramedics were appointed.

(ii) Mobile Medical Units increased to 363 districts in 2009-10 from 310 in 2008-09 to provide diagnostic and outpatient care closer to hamlets and villages in remote areas.

(iii) About 50,000 Village Health and Sanitation Committees (VHSCs) set up.

(iv) Under National Programme for Control of Blindness, number of cataract opera­tion performed have registered a significant increase from about 22 lakh opera­tions in 2007-08 to 59 lakh cataract operations in 2009-10. The Reproductive and Child Health Programme and National Disease Control Programmes are compo­nents of NRHM.

2. Reproductive and Child Health:

(i) Under Navjaat Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (NSSK-New born care programme) launched on 15th of September, 2009, district level trainers have been developed for all the erstwhile EAG States and Jammu & Kashmir, while State level trainers have been developed in Non-EAG States. 1400 trainers have already been trained.

(ii) Under Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY), a safe motherhood intervention for promot­ing institutional delivery, the number of beneficiaries increased from 7.39 lakh in 2005-06 to about 1 crore in 2009-10, registering an increase of 10 lakh during 2009- 10.

3. Communicable Disease Control and Prevention:

(i) For the first time in the country, National Sample Survey to estimate burden of Leprosy is being taken up.

(ii) DOTS-Plus programme for management of Multi Drug Resistant (MDR)-Tuberculosis (TB) was initiated in 4 more states bringing up the total to 10 States.

(iii) Up gradation of National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) as Centre of Excel­lence of Public Health has been taken up.

(iv) State of art Blood Banks are being set up in four Metropolitan cities of New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai at an estimated cost of Rs.468 crore.

(v) State of art Plasma Fractionation centre is being set up in Chennai at a cost of Rs.250 crore to produce blood components currently being imported.

4. Non-Communicable Disease Control and Prevention:

(i) To increase the availability of trained personnel required for mental health care, 7 regional institutes have been funded against the 11 to be undertaken during 11th Plan for production of clinical psychologists, psychiatrists, psychiatric nursing and psychiatric social workers.

(ii) National Policies for Geriatric Care, cardio vascular & diabetes and cancer finalised for a total outlay of about Rs.1519 crore.

5. Medical Education:

(i) To increase the number of doctors across the country and for opening more medi­cal colleges, norms relating to requirement and land and infrastructure have been rationalised in order to attract more entrepreneurs, particularly in under-served and difficult areas.

(ii) Infrastructure requirements for setting up new medical colleges have been ratio­nalized and requirement of bed strength and patient occupancy has been relaxed.

(iii) Companies registered in India have been permitted, for the first time, to set up medical colleges.

(iv) To increase availability of doctors, ceiling for MBBS admissions has been raised in Government colleges from 150 to 250 depending on bed strength.

(v) To encourage Government medical officers and fresh MBBS graduates to serve in remote, difficult and inaccessible areas of the country.

(vi) To overcome the acute shortage of faculty in medical colleges and specialists and super specialists in hospitals.

(vii) To overcome shortage of faculty in medical colleges at different levels, i.e., Assis­tant Professor, Associate Professor and Professor level, the requirement of num­ber of years of service stipulated in the Medical Council of India (MCI) regulations in each of the three grades has been reduced by one year, i.e., from 4 years to 3 years.

(viii) Setting up of one national institute and 8 regional institutes of paramedical sci­ences across the country is under approval for an estimated cost of Rs.1000 crore.

(ix) To encourage entrepreneurs establish more AYUSH institutions the requirement of land, infrastructure and faculty for the establishment of AYUSH colleges and hospitals have been further rationalised, including reduction in land requirement from 10 acres to 5 acres.

6. Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana:

(i) For setting up of AIIMS like institutions, environmental clearance was obtained for hospitals and medical colleges to be set up at Bhubaneswar, Patna, Jodhpur, Rishikesh, Raipur and Bhopal sites in 2009. Hostel construction in all the places is at advance stage of completion.

(ii) Works for Medical College Complex for all six sites have been awarded. Award of work for construction of hospital complex is under finalization and work likely to start by June, 2010 to be completed in two years.

(iii) For completion of construction of college and hospital before the prescribed time, an incentive up to Rs.12.5 crore shall be payable to contractor. However, for delay beyond the prescribed time of up to 6 months, penalty up to Rs.25 crore shall be levied and for delay beyond six months, contractor shall be liable to be blacklisted for a specified period.

7. Primary Health Care:

During the Eleventh Five Year Plan, major focus is given on NRHM initiatives. Efforts are being made for restructuring and reorganizing all health facilities below district level into the Three Tier Rural Primary Health Care System. These will serve the populations in a well-defined area and have referral linkages with each other. Population-centric norms, which continue to drive the provisioning of health infrastructure, will be modi­fied.

These will be replaced with flexible norms comprising habitation-based needs, com­munity-based needs, and disease pattern-based needs. Steps have also been taken to reorganize Urban Primary Health Care Institutions and make them responsible for the health care of people living in a defined geographic area, particularly slum dwellers.

8. Secondary and Tertiary Health Care:

Secondary and Tertiary health care is receiving attention. There is an urgent need to take a fresh look at how public and private sector can be better utilized during the Elev­enth Five Year Plan. The NRHM addresses these issues through a few strategies. Priori­ties are being given to strategies involving PPPs, risk pooling mechanisms, and cross subsidization.

District hospitals, which play a key role in providing health services to the poor, need substantial improvement in infrastructure and other facilities to perform their role more effectively. This would also be a key intermediate step in the health strat­egy, till the vision of health care through PHCs and community health centres is fully realized. The Plan will also complete setting up of 6 AIIMS-like institutions, upgrading 13 existing medical institutes under the NRHM scheme.


6. Essay on the Objectives of Health Sector during 11th Plan:
Objectives of health sector during 11th Plan are as follows:

(i) Reducing Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) to 1 per 1,000 live births.

(ii) Reducing Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) to 28 per 1,000 live births.

(iii) Reducing malnutrition among children in the age group 0-3 year to half its present level.

(iv) Reducing anaemia among women and girls by 50 per cent.

(v) Raising the sex ratio in the age group 0-6 years to 935 by 2011-12, and to 950 by 2016-17.

(vi) Filaria/Microfilaria Reduction Rate- 70 per cent by 2010, 80 per cent by 2012 and elimination by 2015.

(vii) Dengue Mortality Reduction Rate- 50 per cent by 2010 and sustaining at that level until 2012.

(viii) Cataract operations: Increase to 46 lakhs by 2012.

(ix) Leprosy Prevalence Rate- Reduce from 1.8 per 10,000 in 2005 to less than 1 per 10,000 thereafter.

(x) Tuberculosis DOTS series- Maintain 85 per cent cure rate through entire mission period and also sustain planned case detection rate. In terms of systems improve­ments the NRHM targets were quite moderate.

(xi) Upgrade all PHCs into 24×7 PHCs by the year 2010.

(xii) Upgrading all Community Health Centres to Indian Public Health Standards.

(xiii) Engaging 4,00,000 female Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs).

Strengthening Existing Health System:

There is need to shift to decentralization of functions to hospital units/health centres and local bodies. The States need to move away from the narrow focus on the imple­mentation of budgeted programmes and vertical schemes. They need to develop sys­tems that comprehensively address the health needs of all citizens.

Thus, in order to improve the health care services in the country, the Eleventh Five Year Plan will insist on Integrated District Health Plans and Block Specific Health Plans. It will mandate involve­ment of all health related sectors and emphasize partnership with PRIs, local bodies, communities, NGOs, Voluntary and Civil Society Organizations.


7. Essay on Health is Wealth – Universal Immunization Program (UIP):
Universal Immunization (is the process by which an individual’s immune system becomes fortified against an agent) Program is a vaccination program launched by the Government of India in 1985. It became a part of Child Survival and Safe Motherhood Program in 1992 and is currently one of the key areas under National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) since 2005.

The program consists of vaccination for seven diseases – tuberculosis, diphtheria, pertussis (whooping cough), tetanus, poliomyelitis, measles and Hepatitis B. Hepatitis B was added to the UIP in 2007. Thus, UIP has 7 vaccine preventable diseases in the program.

On 2014 it was announced that four vaccines will be added to the program, namely rotavirus, rubella and Japanese encephalitis, as well as the injectable polio vaccine.

Vaccine:

It is one of the largest in the world in terms of quantities of vaccine used, the number of beneficiaries, the number of Immunisation session organised, the geographical spread and diversity of areas covered.

The national policy of Immunization of all children during the first year of life with DPT, OPV, BCG to complete the series of primary vaccination before reaching the age of one year was adopted in 1978 with the lunching of EPI to increase the Immunization coverage in infancy to 80%.

Yuva:

Youth Unite for Victory on AIDS (YUVA) is a plan of action prepared by India’s Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports (MYA&S) in collaboration with the National AIDS Control Organization (NACO) and 7 local youth-oriented organizations. Launched in June 2006, this national initiative is designed to reach out to adolescents and youth in all parts of the country with HIV/AIDS prevention information and action messages.

The aim of the project is to:

i. Ensure that by 2010 all young people in India have accurate information, skills and access to HIV prevention services/facilities in a conducive, safe and supportive environment.

ii. Reaching out to young people at the highest risk of new infection, such as migrant and mobile youth workers, is a program priority.

YUVA is Youth Unite for Victory against AIDS, a five-year government action plan to create awareness among 450 million youth and adolescents in the country about AIDS. With India topping the chart of number of HIV infected people; the ministry of youth affairs’ move is all the more urgent. “AIDS can particularly be a youth problem.

The focus of the program is awareness that prevention is the key to tackle the situation,” Under the plan, youth volunteers will take pledge on a seven-point program.” The program will create awareness about HIV/AIDS, child marriage, gender equality with focus on dowry and sex determination tests and empowerment for livelihood.


8. Essay on the Epidemiological Perspectives of Health:
Epidemiology is the cornerstone of public health, and shapes policy decisions and evidence-based practice by identifying risk factors for disease and targets for preventive healthcare.

Epidemiology, literally meaning “the study of what is upon the people”, is derived from Greek epi, meaning “upon, among”, demos, meaning “people, district”, and logos, meaning “study, word, discourse”.

Epidemiology is concerned with the incidence of disease in populations and does not address the question of the cause of an individual’s disease. This question, sometimes referred to as specific causation, is beyond the domain of the science of epidemiology Epidemiology has its limits at the point where an inference is made that the relationship between an agent and a disease is causal (general causation) and where the magnitude of excess risk attributed to the agent has been determined.

Epidemiology has developed a strong role as a “basic” science and a position of growing respect among academic researchers. This role has fundamental importance for public health, since the best opportunities to prevent disease and improve health often come from advances in basic understanding of the causes of disease, the development of new methods to study them, and the assessment of preventive and control measures.


9. Essay on Disease Burden and Surveillance:
Disease burden is the impact of a health problem as measured by financial cost, mortality, morbidity, or other indicators. It is often quantified in terms of quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) or disability- adjusted life years (DALYs), both of which quantify the number of years lost due to disease (YLDs).

The environmental burden of disease is defined as the number of DALYs that can be attributed to environmental factors. These measures allow for comparison of disease burdens, and have also been used to forecast the possible impacts of health interventions. By 2014 DALYs per head were “40% higher in low-income and middle-income regions.

The World Health Organization (WHO) has provided set of detailed guidelines for measuring disease burden at the local or national level. The public health impacts of air pollution, noise pollution, and radiation can be quantified using DALYs.

For each disease, a DALY is calculated as–

DALYs = number of people with the disease x duration of the disease (or loss of life expectancy in the case of mortality) x severity (varying from 0 for perfect health to 1 for death).

Surveillance is the monitoring of the behavior, activities, or other changing information, usually of people for the purpose of influencing, managing, directing, or protecting them.

Disease Surveillance:

Disease surveillance is an epidemiological practice by which the spread of disease is monitored in order to establish patterns of progression.

Public health surveillance provides the scientific and factual database essential to informed decision making and appropriate public health action. The key objective of surveillance is to provide information to guide interventions. The public health objectives and actions needed to make successful interventions determine the design and implementation of surveillance systems.

The main objectives of disease surveillance is to predict, observe, and minimize the harm caused by outbreak, epidemic situations, as well as increase knowledge about which factors contribute to such circumstances. The World Health Organization is the lead agency for coordinating global response to major diseases. The WHO maintains Web sites for a number of diseases, and has active teams in many countries where these diseases occur.

Various public health surveillances are listed below:

1. Active Surveillance:

Active surveillance provides the most accurate and timely information, but it is also expensive.

2. Passive Surveillance:

Passive surveillance is a relatively inexpensive strategy to cover large areas, and it provides critical information for monitoring a community’s health. However, because passive surveillance depends on people in different institutions to provide data, data quality and timeliness are difficult to control.

3. Routine Health Information System:

A passive system in which regular reports about diseases and programs are completed by public health staff members, hospitals, and clinics.

4. Health Information and Management System:

A passive system by which routine reports about financial, logistic, and other processes involved in the administration of the public health and clinical systems can be used for surveillance.

5. Categorical Surveillance:

An active or passive system that focuses on one or more diseases or behaviors of interest to an intervention program. These systems are useful for program managers. However, they may be inefficient at the district or local level, at which staff may need to fill out multiple forms on the same patient (that is, the HIV program, the tuberculosis program, the sexually transmitted infections program, and the Routine Health Information System).

6. Integrated Surveillance:

A combination of active and passive systems using a single infrastructure that gathers information about multiple diseases or behaviors of interest to several intervention programs (for example -, a health facility-based system may gather information on multiple infectious diseases and injuries).

7. Syndromic Surveillance:

An active or passive system that uses case definitions that are based entirely on clinical features without any clinical or laboratory diagnosis (for example – collecting the number of cases of diarrhea rather than cases of cholera, or “rash illness” rather than measles). Because syndromic surveillance is inexpensive and is faster than systems that require laboratory confirmation, it is often the first kind of surveillance begun in a developing country. In the specialized area of surveillance.

8. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS):

An active system of repeated surveys that measure behaviors that are known to cause disease or injury (for example, tobacco or alcohol use, unprotected sex, or lack of physical exercise). Because the aim of many intervention program strategies is to prevent disease by preventing unhealthy behavior, these surveys provide a direct measure of their effect in the population, often long before the anticipated health effects are expected. These surveys are useful for providing timely measures of program effectiveness for both communicable and non-communicable disease interventions.