Most important tip for a healthy body is to have healthy food and eat them at proper time. Avoid eating junk food. None of the nutrients are available in these junks foods so no point in having them. Your diet should contain food which has more nutrients. Try to include leafy vegetables, fresh vegetables, fruits, milk, and fish in your daily diet. Make sure you are having your breakfast regularly. Skipping your breakfast regularly will definitely affect your health. If water content in your body goes low then it will lead to dehydration. So to keep the body healthy make sure you drink more amount of water daily.

Exercise also pays a vital role in keeping your body healthy. Regular exercise will also keep your body in good health. By exercise it doesn’t mean a simple and slow walk. It should be in such a way that your body should start sweating. You can go for running, do cycling, walking faster etc. Daily find some time 30 mints to one hour per day for your exercise. Have a regular checking of your weight and try to control it. It’s nice to have Medical checkups and dental checkups by which you can have an idea about your health condition.

Apart from these always try to manage your stress. Most people due to stress at work have health problems. By controlling your stress you can maintain a healthy body. Bad habits like smoking, drinking, using of drugs should be avoided. Usage of these items will have a very bad affect on your health. Your body should get enough time to take rest. Make sure you get a sleep of 8 hours daily. Sleep is very important for healthy body and also for mental and emotional happiness.

For a healthy and fit body you need to keep on doing exercise. Many factors will come across us and can divert us from achieving our goal of being fit and healthy. But you should be having strong self discipline and will power to achieve this healthy and fit body. Below given are some methods through which can maintain a fit and healthy body.
Most important is the exercise. Make it a routine to move your body. You can do this by running around your home, playing with your kids, climbing up and down the stair case and so on. This will help in increasing your blood circulation. You can also join a gym where you will have an instructor who can guide you to have a healthy and fit body. Try to avoid fatty food and junk food. These foods are not going to give any nutrients to your body. Better stick on to a diet which includes fresh vegetables, fruits, fish and Dairy Products such as milk. Limited number of dried fruits can be included in your diet. Reduce intake of foods which are more salty and food with more sugar. Too much sugar and salt is bad for health. Have food at proper timings .Try not skip any meals. If you don’t feel hungry also eat something but don’t skip the meals.
Maintaining a Healthy Body When people eat the things that they want to at the time, it's an almost guaranteed bet that they don't know what's nutrients are inside of the food, or what's good for their body.  If they did, they wouldn't put half of what they eat in it.  What you put in and out of your body decides how healthy your body can or will become.  Having good eating and drinking habits will most likely force your body to be in good health.  To have a healthy body, junk food needs to be avoided.  If too much of the wrong foods can cause your body to deteriorate slowly.  There are several ways to maintain a healthy body. One of these ways to eating properly is to follow the foods that are on the food pyramid.
Too much alcohol can only be harmful to your body.  This list isn't the only way to maintaining a healthy body.  
There are six different food groups that can help you maintain a healthy diet and body.  The groups are: meat, bread and cereal, fruits, dairy, vegetables, and fats/oils.  These groups provide the nutrients that a body needs.  The meat group includes other foods beside the basic beef.  There are foods like poultry, fish, dry beans, eggs, and nuts.  The bread/cereal group also includes pasta and rice.  Fruits are pretty self-explanatory right along with vegetables.  The dairy products are the foods made with milk like yogurt and cheese.  One group that you need but can't have a lot of is the fats.  Even though it has fat in it, your body can't live on those nutrients alone.  All of the foods go hand in hand, if used properly.  That means you have to maintain a good eating balance.
Balancing your diet is one of the most important way to staying healthy. 