A healthy body goes hand in hand with a person’s healthy lifestyle whose characteristics include someone who does not smoke, has a Body Mass Index (BMI) between 18.5 and 25, eats 5 portions of fruit and vegetables a day and has daily exercise (9). The World Health Organisation (WHO) classify values outside of the normal parameters as being underweight if the value is below 18.5 while values exceeding 25 are considered to be overweight (14). To put this into context, it is reported by the Northern Ireland (NI) Executive that 450 deaths in NI were caused by obesity in 2010 while Trevedi (2006) estimates that 75% of worldwide deaths from non-contagious diseases will be related to an unhealthy diet by 2020
Eating healthy is imperative for your life. A healthy diet is the key to being fit. It is unlike any other regimen. You will feel so pure, balanced, and alert. A solid regimen even prevents some health issues. You will love your body and your body will love you if you begin healthy eating habits. There are significant reasons why eating healthy is vital to your health.
Maintaining healthy eating habits does so much for your body. Eating healthy can prevent and control health problems. It has shown to help and prevent heart disease, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and even some cancers. It is not the same as going on a diet for weight control.
Eating unhealthily can lead to obesity and illness, which makes developing healthy eating habits a vital part of living. Eating healthy can prevent and control health problems. It can help you stay balanced and improve your mood. Maintaining a well-balanced diet provides the necessary nutrients that your body need to grow. In any case, don’t abruptly change your diet and make slow changes. A healthy diet is the key to a happy, long, fit life.
The Importance of Eating Healthy

Eating healthy is imperative for your life. A healthy diet is the key to being fit. It is unlike any other regimen. You will feel so pure, balanced, and alert. A solid regimen even prevents some health issues. You will love your body and your body will love you if you begin healthy eating habits. There are significant reasons why eating healthy is vital to your health.

Maintaining healthy eating habits does so much for your body. Eating healthy can prevent and control health problems. It has shown to help and prevent heart disease, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and even some cancers. It is not the same as going on a diet for weight control. Diets are temporary and make you eat less food rather than the right

What is healthy eating ? Healthy eating is not about strict nutrition philosophies, staying unrealistically thin, or depriving yourself of the foods you love. Rather, it’s about feeling great, having more energy, stabilizing your mood, and keeping yourself as healthy as possible– all of which can be achieved by learning some nutrition basics and using them in a way that works for you. You can expand your range of healthy food choices and learn how to plan ahead to create and maintain a tasty, healthy diet.
