Good health care happens through a partnership between you and your health-care provider. Here are some tips on how you can work with your providers to get the best health care.
Physical Health involves getting adequate sleep and rest, eating nutritious meals, drinking enough water, and being physically active on a regular basis. I put a bed on my poster to represent that I get enough rest every night so that I can be refreshed in the morning. I make my bed comfortable and only use it for sleeping purposes so that I do not become distracted with other things that keep me awake, like the television. I put fries on my poster because fries are my favorite food.
Take part in your health care.
Tell each provider about what health care you have had and who has provided it.
Let them know about any other treatments you have tried that were not prescribed by a doctor, such as herbal treatments, home remedies or acupuncture.
Tell your providers about any cultural and spiritual needs you may have.
To be sure you understand health-care instructions, repeat them to a family member or friend.
Let any provider know if you are not sure about any part of your care. If you think something might not be safe, tell your providers right away.
Ask questions, ask questions, ask questions.
When you choose a health-care provider, pick one who is easy to talk with about your health care.
Ask your provider when and how you will get the results of any test or treatment. When you get the results, make sure you know what the results mean for you.
Have your provider explain your treatment choices, any treatment risks and how treatment may help.
Get a second opinion if you are not sure about what treatment to choose.
Learn what changes you need to make to help you get better.
Bonus Tips:

Make decisions about your health care by completing these Advance Directives:

Bring a family member or friend with you to be your partner in care.
Pick someone who will speak up for you and help get things done for you.
Show your partner in care where to find your medical records at home. Let them know what medicines you take and where they are located.
Plan for your partner in care to stay with you during exams, treatments and in the hospital.
It’s OK for your partner in care to ask questions and take notes.
Require each provider to know who you are before they treat you.
Ask providers to checktwo forms of identification each time they care for you.
If you are given a wristband, be sure it has your name on it and that your name is spelled right.
Also, look for the name badge on all providers who are caring for you.
WHAT IS HEALTH PROMOTION Health promotion is the process of advising, or giving information to develop the knowledge and skills to promote or change the behavior that affects health. It covers a wild range of social interventions that benefits and protects individual health and promote the quality of life by preventing the root causes of bad, ill health not just focusing on treatment and cure, which helps people to increase control over and to improve their health and life style. Health promotion is the best way to change a person’s life, which is why we use it to save individuals from risking their life and reducing the human race.