"ACT I"
"SCENE I. London. The palace."
"Enter KING HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, the EARL of WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and others"
"So shaken as we are, so wan with care,"
"Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,"
"And breathe short-winded accents of new broils"
"To be commenced in strands afar remote."
"No more the thirsty entrance of this soil"
"Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood,"
"Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields,"
"Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofs"
"Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes,"
"Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,"
"All of one nature, of one substance bred,"
"Did lately meet in the intestine shock"
"And furious close of civil butchery"
"Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,"
"March all one way and be no more opposed"
"Against acquaintance, kindred and allies:"
"The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,"
"No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,"
"As far as to the sepulchre of Christ,"
"Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross"
"We are impressed and engaged to fight,"
"Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,"
"Whose arms were moulded in their mothers' womb"
"To chase these pagans in those holy fields"
"Over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet"
"Which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd"
"For our advantage on the bitter cross."
"But this our purpose now is twelve month old,"
"And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go:"
"Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear"
"Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,"
"What yesternight our council did decree"
"In forwarding this dear expedience."
"My liege, this haste was hot in question,"
"And many limits of the charge set down"
"But yesternight: when all athwart there came"
"A post from Wales loaden with heavy news,"
"Whose worst was, that the noble Mortimer,"
"Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight"
"Against the irregular and wild Glendower,"
"Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,"
"A thousand of his people butchered,"
"Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,"
"Such beastly shameless transformation,"
"By those Welshwomen done as may not be"
"Without much shame retold or spoken of."
"It seems then that the tidings of this broil"
"Brake off our business for the Holy Land."
"This match'd with other did, my gracious lord,"
"For more uneven and unwelcome news"
"Came from the north and thus it did import:"
"On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,"
"Young Harry Percy and brave Archibald,"
"That ever-valiant and approved Scot,"
"At Holmedon met,"
"Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour,"
"As by discharge of their artillery,"
"And shape of likelihood, the news was told,"
"For he that brought them, in the very heat"
"And pride of their contention did take horse,"
"Uncertain of the issue any way."
"Here is a dear, a true industrious friend,"
"Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse."
"Stain'd with the variation of each soil"
"Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours,"
"And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news."
"The Earl of Douglas is discomfited:"
"Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights,"
"Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see"
"On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur took"
"Mordake the Earl of Fife, and eldest son"
"To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Athol,"
"Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith:"
"And is not this an honourable spoil?"
"A gallant prize? ha, cousin, is it not?"
"In faith,"
"It is a conquest for a prince to boast of."
"Yea, there thou makest me sad and makest me sin"
"In envy that my Lord Northumberland"
"Should be the father to so blest a son,"
"A son who is the theme of honour's tongue,"
"Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant,"
"Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride:"
"Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,"
"See riot and dishonour stain the brow"
"Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved"
"That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged"
"In cradle-clothes our children where they lay,"
"And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet!"
"Then would I have his Harry, and he mine."
"But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,"
"Of this young Percy's pride? the prisoners,"
"Which he in this adventure hath surprised,"
"To his own use he keeps, and sends me word,"
"I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife."
"This is his uncle's teaching, this is Worcester,"
"Malevolent to you in all aspects,"
"Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up"
"The crest of youth against your dignity."
"But I have sent for him to answer this,"
"And for this cause awhile we must neglect"
"Our holy purpose to Jerusalem."
"Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we"
"Will hold at Windsor, so inform the lords:"
"But come yourself with speed to us again,"
"For more is to be said and to be done"
"Than out of anger can be uttered."
"I will, my liege."
Exeunt
"SCENE II. London. An apartment of the Prince's."
"Enter the PRINCE OF WALES and FALSTAFF"
"Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?"
"Thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sack"
"and unbuttoning thee after supper and sleeping upon"
"benches after noon, that thou hast forgotten to"
"demand that truly which thou wouldst truly know."
"What a devil hast thou to do with the time of the"
"day? Unless hours were cups of sack and minutes"
"capons and clocks the tongues of bawds and dials the"
"signs of leaping-houses and the blessed sun himself"
"a fair hot wench in flame-coloured taffeta, I see no"
"reason why thou shouldst be so superfluous to demand"
"the time of the day."
"Indeed, you come near me now, Hal, for we that take"
"purses go by the moon and the seven stars, and not"
"by Phoebus, he,'that wandering knight so fair.' And,"
"I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as, God"
"save thy grace,--majesty I should say, for grace"
"thou wilt have none,--"
"What, none?"
"No, by my troth, not so much as will serve to"
"prologue to an egg and butter."
"Well, how then? come, roundly, roundly."
"Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not"
"us that are squires of the night's body be called"
"thieves of the day's beauty: let us be Diana's"
"foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the"
"moon, and let men say we be men of good government,"
"being governed, as the sea is, by our noble and"
"chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal."
"Thou sayest well, and it holds well too, for the"
"fortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb and"
"flow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is,"
"by the moon. As, for proof, now: a purse of gold"
"most resolutely snatched on Monday night and most"
"dissolutely spent on Tuesday morning, got with"
"swearing 'Lay by' and spent with crying 'Bring in,'"
"now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder"
"and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows."
"By the Lord, thou sayest true, lad. And is not my"
"hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?"
"As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle. And"
"is not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?"
"How now, how now, mad wag! what, in thy quips and"
"thy quiddities? what a plague have I to do with a"
"buff jerkin?"
"Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?"
"Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many a"
"time and oft."
"Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?"
"No, I'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there."
"Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch,"
"and where it would not, I have used my credit."
"Yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent"
"that thou art heir apparent--But, I prithee, sweet"
"wag, shall there be gallows standing in England when"
"thou art king? and resolution thus fobbed as it is"
"with the rusty curb of old father antic the law? Do"
"not thou, when thou art king, hang a thief."
"No, thou shalt."
"Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge."
"Thou judgest false already: I mean, thou shalt have"
"the hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman."
"Well, Hal, well, and in some sort it jumps with my"
"humour as well as waiting in the court, I can tell"
you.
"For obtaining of suits?"
"Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman"
"hath no lean wardrobe. 'Sblood, I am as melancholy"
"as a gib cat or a lugged bear."
"Or an old lion, or a lover's lute."
"Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe."
"What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy of"
Moor-ditch?
"Thou hast the most unsavoury similes and art indeed"
"the most comparative, rascalliest, sweet young"
"prince. But, Hal, I prithee, trouble me no more"
"with vanity. I would to God thou and I knew where a"
"commodity of good names were to be bought. An old"
"lord of the council rated me the other day in the"
"street about you, sir, but I marked him not, and yet"
"he talked very wisely, but I regarded him not, and"
"yet he talked wisely, and in the street too."
"Thou didst well, for wisdom cries out in the"
"streets, and no man regards it."
"O, thou hast damnable iteration and art indeed able"
"to corrupt a saint. Thou hast done much harm upon"
"me, Hal, God forgive thee for it! Before I knew"
"thee, Hal, I knew nothing, and now am I, if a man"
"should speak truly, little better than one of the"
"wicked. I must give over this life, and I will give"
"it over: by the Lord, and I do not, I am a villain:"
"I'll be damned for never a king's son in"
Christendom.
"Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?"
"'Zounds, where thou wilt, lad, I'll make one, an I"
"do not, call me villain and baffle me."
"I see a good amendment of life in thee, from praying"
"to purse-taking."
"Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal, 'tis no sin for a"
"man to labour in his vocation."
"Enter POINS"
"Poins! Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a"
"match. O, if men were to be saved by merit, what"
"hole in hell were hot enough for him? This is the"
"most omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand' to"
"a true man."
"Good morrow, Ned."
"Good morrow, sweet Hal. What says Monsieur Remorse?"
"what says Sir John Sack and Sugar? Jack! how"
"agrees the devil and thee about thy soul, that thou"
"soldest him on Good-Friday last for a cup of Madeira"
"and a cold capon's leg?"
"Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have"
"his bargain, for he was never yet a breaker of"
"proverbs: he will give the devil his due."
"Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil."
"Else he had been damned for cozening the devil."
"But, my lads, my lads, to-morrow morning, by four"
"o'clock, early at Gadshill! there are pilgrims going"
"to Canterbury with rich offerings, and traders"
"riding to London with fat purses: I have vizards"
"for you all, you have horses for yourselves:"
"Gadshill lies to-night in Rochester: I have bespoke"
"supper to-morrow night in Eastcheap: we may do it"
"as secure as sleep. If you will go, I will stuff"
"your purses full of crowns, if you will not, tarry"
"at home and be hanged."
"Hear ye, Yedward, if I tarry at home and go not,"
"I'll hang you for going."
"You will, chops?"
"Hal, wilt thou make one?"
"Who, I rob? I a thief? not I, by my faith."
"There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good"
"fellowship in thee, nor thou camest not of the blood"
"royal, if thou darest not stand for ten shillings."
"Well then, once in my days I'll be a madcap."
"Why, that's well said."
"Well, come what will, I'll tarry at home."
"By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king."
"I care not."
"Sir John, I prithee, leave the prince and me alone:"
"I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure"
"that he shall go."
"Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion and him"
"the ears of profiting, that what thou speakest may"
"move and what he hears may be believed, that the"
"true prince may, for recreation sake, prove a false"
"thief, for the poor abuses of the time want"
"countenance. Farewell: you shall find me in Eastcheap."
"Farewell, thou latter spring! farewell, All-hallown summer!"
"Exit Falstaff"
"Now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us"
"to-morrow: I have a jest to execute that I cannot"
"manage alone. Falstaff, Bardolph, Peto and Gadshill"
"shall rob those men that we have already waylaid:"
"yourself and I will not be there, and when they"
"have the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cut"
"this head off from my shoulders."
"How shall we part with them in setting forth?"
"Why, we will set forth before or after them, and"
"appoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is at"
"our pleasure to fail, and then will they adventure"
"upon the exploit themselves, which they shall have"
"no sooner achieved, but we'll set upon them."
"Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our"
"horses, by our habits and by every other"
"appointment, to be ourselves."
"Tut! our horses they shall not see: I'll tie them"
"in the wood, our vizards we will change after we"
"leave them: and, sirrah, I have cases of buckram"
"for the nonce, to immask our noted outward garments."
"Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us."
"Well, for two of them, I know them to be as"
"true-bred cowards as ever turned back, and for the"
"third, if he fight longer than he sees reason, I'll"
"forswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be, the"
"incomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue will"
"tell us when we meet at supper: how thirty, at"
"least, he fought with, what wards, what blows, what"
"extremities he endured, and in the reproof of this"
"lies the jest."
"Well, I'll go with thee: provide us all things"
"necessary and meet me to-morrow night in Eastcheap,"
"there I'll sup. Farewell."
"Farewell, my lord."
"Exit Poins"
"I know you all, and will awhile uphold"
"The unyoked humour of your idleness:"
"Yet herein will I imitate the sun,"
"Who doth permit the base contagious clouds"
"To smother up his beauty from the world,"
"That, when he please again to be himself,"
"Being wanted, he may be more wonder'd at,"
"By breaking through the foul and ugly mists"
"Of vapours that did seem to strangle him."
"If all the year were playing holidays,"
"To sport would be as tedious as to work,"
"But when they seldom come, they wish'd for come,"
"And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents."
"So, when this loose behavior I throw off"
"And pay the debt I never promised,"
"By how much better than my word I am,"
"By so much shall I falsify men's hopes,"
"And like bright metal on a sullen ground,"
"My reformation, glittering o'er my fault,"
"Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes"
"Than that which hath no foil to set it off."
"I'll so offend, to make offence a skill,"
"Redeeming time when men think least I will."
Exit
"SCENE III. London. The palace."
"Enter the KING, NORTHUMBERLAND, WORCESTER, HOTSPUR, SIR WALTER BLUNT, with others"
"My blood hath been too cold and temperate,"
"Unapt to stir at these indignities,"
"And you have found me, for accordingly"
"You tread upon my patience: but be sure"
"I will from henceforth rather be myself,"
"Mighty and to be fear'd, than my condition,"
"Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,"
"And therefore lost that title of respect"
"Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud."
"Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves"
"The scourge of greatness to be used on it,"
"And that same greatness too which our own hands"
"Have holp to make so portly."
"My lord.--"
"Worcester, get thee gone, for I do see"
"Danger and disobedience in thine eye:"
"O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,"
"And majesty might never yet endure"
"The moody frontier of a servant brow."
"You have good leave to leave us: when we need"
"Your use and counsel, we shall send for you."
"Exit Worcester"
"You were about to speak."
"To North"
"Yea, my good lord."
"Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded,"
"Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,"
"Were, as he says, not with such strength denied"
"As is deliver'd to your majesty:"
"Either envy, therefore, or misprison"
"Is guilty of this fault and not my son."
"My liege, I did deny no prisoners."
"But I remember, when the fight was done,"
"When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,"
"Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,"
"Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dress'd,"
"Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reap'd"
"Show'd like a stubble-land at harvest-home,"
"He was perfumed like a milliner,"
"And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held"
"A pouncet-box, which ever and anon"
"He gave his nose and took't away again,"
"Who therewith angry, when it next came there,"
"Took it in snuff, and still he smiled and talk'd,"
"And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,"
"He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly,"
"To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse"
"Betwixt the wind and his nobility."
"With many holiday and lady terms"
"He question'd me, amongst the rest, demanded"
"My prisoners in your majesty's behalf."
"I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,"
"To be so pester'd with a popinjay,"
"Out of my grief and my impatience,"
"Answer'd neglectingly I know not what,"
"He should or he should not, for he made me mad"
"To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet"
"And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman"
"Of guns and drums and wounds,--God save the mark!--"
"And telling me the sovereign'st thing on earth"
"Was parmaceti for an inward bruise,"
"And that it was great pity, so it was,"
"This villanous salt-petre should be digg'd"