"Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March"
"Hath lately married. Shall our coffers, then,"
"Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?"
"Shall we but treason? and indent with fears,"
"When they have lost and forfeited themselves?"
"No, on the barren mountains let him starve,"
"For I shall never hold that man my friend"
"Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost"
"To ransom home revolted Mortimer."
"Revolted Mortimer!"
"He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,"
"But by the chance of war, to prove that true"
"Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,"
"Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took"
"When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank,"
"In single opposition, hand to hand,"
"He did confound the best part of an hour"
"In changing hardiment with great Glendower:"
"Three times they breathed and three times did"
"they drink,"
"Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood,"
"Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,"
"Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,"
"And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,"
"Bloodstained with these valiant combatants."
"Never did base and rotten policy"
"Colour her working with such deadly wounds,"
"Nor could the noble Mortimer"
"Receive so many, and all willingly:"
"Then let not him be slander'd with revolt."
"Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him,"
"He never did encounter with Glendower:"
"I tell thee,"
"He durst as well have met the devil alone"
"As Owen Glendower for an enemy."
"Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth"
"Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer:"
"Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,"
"Or you shall hear in such a kind from me"
"As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland,"
"We licence your departure with your son."
"Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it."
"Exeunt King Henry, Blunt, and train"
"An if the devil come and roar for them,"
"I will not send them: I will after straight"
"And tell him so, for I will ease my heart,"
"Albeit I make a hazard of my head."
"What, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile:"
"Here comes your uncle."
"Re-enter WORCESTER"
"Speak of Mortimer!"
"'Zounds, I will speak of him, and let my soul"
"Want mercy, if I do not join with him:"
"Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins,"
"And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,"
"But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer"
"As high in the air as this unthankful king,"
"As this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke."
"Brother, the king hath made your nephew mad."
"Who struck this heat up after I was gone?"
"He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners,"
"And when I urged the ransom once again"
"Of my wife's brother, then his cheek look'd pale,"
"And on my face he turn'd an eye of death,"
"Trembling even at the name of Mortimer."
"I cannot blame him: was not he proclaim'd"
"By Richard that dead is the next of blood?"
"He was, I heard the proclamation:"
"And then it was when the unhappy king,"
"--Whose wrongs in us God pardon!--did set forth"
"Upon his Irish expedition,"
"From whence he intercepted did return"
"To be deposed and shortly murdered."
"And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth"
"Live scandalized and foully spoken of."
"But soft, I pray you, did King Richard then"
"Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer"
"Heir to the crown?"
"He did, myself did hear it."
"Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,"
"That wished him on the barren mountains starve."
"But shall it be that you, that set the crown"
"Upon the head of this forgetful man"
"And for his sake wear the detested blot"
"Of murderous subornation, shall it be,"
"That you a world of curses undergo,"
"Being the agents, or base second means,"
"The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?"
"O, pardon me that I descend so low,"
"To show the line and the predicament"
"Wherein you range under this subtle king,"
"Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,"
"Or fill up chronicles in time to come,"
"That men of your nobility and power"
"Did gage them both in an unjust behalf,"
"As both of you--God pardon it!--have done,"
"To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,"
"An plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?"
"And shall it in more shame be further spoken,"
"That you are fool'd, discarded and shook off"
"By him for whom these shames ye underwent?"
"No, yet time serves wherein you may redeem"
"Your banish'd honours and restore yourselves"
"Into the good thoughts of the world again,"
"Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt"
"Of this proud king, who studies day and night"
"To answer all the debt he owes to you"
"Even with the bloody payment of your deaths:"
"Therefore, I say--"
"Peace, cousin, say no more:"
"And now I will unclasp a secret book,"
"And to your quick-conceiving discontents"
"I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,"
"As full of peril and adventurous spirit"
"As to o'er-walk a current roaring loud"
"On the unsteadfast footing of a spear."
"If he fall in, good night! or sink or swim:"
"Send danger from the east unto the west,"
"So honour cross it from the north to south,"
"And let them grapple: O, the blood more stirs"
"To rouse a lion than to start a hare!"
"Imagination of some great exploit"
"Drives him beyond the bounds of patience."
"By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,"
"To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,"
"Or dive into the bottom of the deep,"
"Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,"
"And pluck up drowned honour by the locks,"
"So he that doth redeem her thence might wear"
"Without corrival, all her dignities:"
"But out upon this half-faced fellowship!"
"He apprehends a world of figures here,"
"But not the form of what he should attend."
"Good cousin, give me audience for a while."
"I cry you mercy."
"Those same noble Scots"
"That are your prisoners,--"
"I'll keep them all,"
"By God, he shall not have a Scot of them,"
"No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not:"
"I'll keep them, by this hand."
"You start away"
"And lend no ear unto my purposes."
"Those prisoners you shall keep."
"Nay, I will, that's flat:"
"He said he would not ransom Mortimer,"
"Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer,"
"But I will find him when he lies asleep,"
"And in his ear I'll holla 'Mortimer!'"
Nay,
"I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak"
"Nothing but 'Mortimer,' and give it him"
"To keep his anger still in motion."
"Hear you, cousin, a word."
"All studies here I solemnly defy,"
"Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke:"
"And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,"
"But that I think his father loves him not"
"And would be glad he met with some mischance,"
"I would have him poison'd with a pot of ale."
"Farewell, kinsman: I'll talk to you"
"When you are better temper'd to attend."
"Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool"
"Art thou to break into this woman's mood,"
"Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!"
"Why, look you, I am whipp'd and scourged with rods,"
"Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear"
"Of this vile politician, Bolingbroke."
"In Richard's time,--what do you call the place?--"
"A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire,"
"'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept,"
"His uncle York, where I first bow'd my knee"
"Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,--"
'Sblood!--
"When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh."
"At Berkley castle."
"You say true:"
"Why, what a candy deal of courtesy"
"This fawning greyhound then did proffer me!"
"Look,'when his infant fortune came to age,'"
"And 'gentle Harry Percy,' and 'kind cousin,'"
"O, the devil take such cozeners! God forgive me!"
"Good uncle, tell your tale, I have done."
"Nay, if you have not, to it again,"
"We will stay your leisure."
"I have done, i' faith."
"Then once more to your Scottish prisoners."
"Deliver them up without their ransom straight,"
"And make the Douglas' son your only mean"
"For powers in Scotland, which, for divers reasons"
"Which I shall send you written, be assured,"
"Will easily be granted. You, my lord,"
"To Northumberland"
"Your son in Scotland being thus employ'd,"
"Shall secretly into the bosom creep"
"Of that same noble prelate, well beloved,"
"The archbishop."
"Of York, is it not?"
"True, who bears hard"
"His brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop."
"I speak not this in estimation,"
"As what I think might be, but what I know"
"Is ruminated, plotted and set down,"
"And only stays but to behold the face"
"Of that occasion that shall bring it on."
"I smell it: upon my life, it will do well."
"Before the game is afoot, thou still let'st slip."
"Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot,"
"And then the power of Scotland and of York,"
"To join with Mortimer, ha?"
"And so they shall."
"In faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd."
"And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,"
"To save our heads by raising of a head,"
"For, bear ourselves as even as we can,"
"The king will always think him in our debt,"
"And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,"
"Till he hath found a time to pay us home:"
"And see already how he doth begin"
"To make us strangers to his looks of love."
"He does, he does: we'll be revenged on him."
"Cousin, farewell: no further go in this"
"Than I by letters shall direct your course."
"When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,"
"I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer,"
"Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,"
"As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,"
"To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,"
"Which now we hold at much uncertainty."
"Farewell, good brother: we shall thrive, I trust."
"Uncle, Adieu: O, let the hours be short"
"Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport!"
Exeunt
"ACT II"
"SCENE I. Rochester. An inn yard."
"Enter a Carrier with a lantern in his hand"
"Heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I'll be"
"hanged: Charles' wain is over the new chimney, and"
"yet our horse not packed. What, ostler!"
"[Within]   Anon, anon."
"I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocks"
"in the point, poor jade, is wrung in the withers out"
"of all cess."
"Enter another Carrier"
"Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that"
"is the next way to give poor jades the bots: this"
"house is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died."
"Poor fellow, never joyed since the price of oats"
"rose, it was the death of him."
"I think this be the most villanous house in all"
"London road for fleas: I am stung like a tench."
"Like a tench! by the mass, there is ne'er a king"
"christen could be better bit than I have been since"
"the first cock."
"Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we"
"leak in your chimney, and your chamber-lie breeds"
"fleas like a loach."
"What, ostler! come away and be hanged!"
"I have a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger,"
"to be delivered as far as Charing-cross."
"God's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quite"
"starved. What, ostler! A plague on thee! hast thou"
"never an eye in thy head? canst not hear? An"
"'twere not as good deed as drink, to break the pate"
"on thee, I am a very villain. Come, and be hanged!"
"hast thou no faith in thee?"
"Enter GADSHILL"
"Good morrow, carriers. What's o'clock?"
"I think it be two o'clock."
"I pray thee lend me thy lantern, to see my gelding"
"in the stable."
"Nay, by God, soft, I know a trick worth two of that, i' faith."
"I pray thee, lend me thine."
"Ay, when? can'st tell? Lend me thy lantern, quoth"
"he? marry, I'll see thee hanged first."
"Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?"
"Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant"
"thee. Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up the"
"gentleman: they will along with company, for they"
"have great charge."
"Exeunt carriers"
"What, ho! chamberlain!"
"[Within]  At hand, quoth pick-purse."
"That's even as fair as--at hand, quoth the"
"chamberlain, for thou variest no more from picking"
"of purses than giving direction doth from labouring,"
"thou layest the plot how."
"Enter Chamberlain"
"Good morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds current that"
"I told you yesternight: there's a franklin in the"
"wild of Kent hath brought three hundred marks with"
"him in gold: I heard him tell it to one of his"
"company last night at supper, a kind of auditor, one"
"that hath abundance of charge too, God knows what."
"They are up already, and call for eggs and butter,"
"they will away presently."
"Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas'"
"clerks, I'll give thee this neck."
"No, I'll none of it: I pray thee keep that for the"
"hangman, for I know thou worshippest St. Nicholas"
"as truly as a man of falsehood may."
"What talkest thou to me of the hangman? if I hang,"
"I'll make a fat pair of gallows, for if I hang, old"
"Sir John hangs with me, and thou knowest he is no"
"starveling. Tut! there are other Trojans that thou"
"dreamest not of, the which for sport sake are"
"content to do the profession some grace, that would,"
"if matters should be looked into, for their own"
"credit sake, make all whole. I am joined with no"
"foot-land rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers,"
"none of these mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms,"
"but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters and"
"great oneyers, such as can hold in, such as will"
"strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner than"
"drink, and drink sooner than pray: and yet, zounds,"
"I lie, for they pray continually to their saint, the"
"commonwealth, or rather, not pray to her, but prey"
"on her, for they ride up and down on her and make"
"her their boots."
"What, the commonwealth their boots? will she hold"
"out water in foul way?"
"She will, she will, justice hath liquored her. We"
"steal as in a castle, cocksure, we have the receipt"
"of fern-seed, we walk invisible."
"Nay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding to"
"the night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible."
"Give me thy hand: thou shalt have a share in our"
"purchase, as I am a true man."
"Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief."
"Go to, 'homo' is a common name to all men. Bid the"
"ostler bring my gelding out of the stable. Farewell,"
"you muddy knave."
Exeunt
"SCENE II. The highway, near Gadshill."
"Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS"
"Come, shelter, shelter: I have removed Falstaff's"
"horse, and he frets like a gummed velvet."
"Stand close."
"Enter FALSTAFF"
"Poins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins!"
"Peace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal! what a brawling dost"
"thou keep!"
"Where's Poins, Hal?"
"He is walked up to the top of the hill: I'll go seek him."
"I am accursed to rob in that thief's company: the"
"rascal hath removed my horse, and tied him I know"
"not where. If I travel but four foot by the squier"
"further afoot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt"
"not but to die a fair death for all this, if I"
"'scape hanging for killing that rogue. I have"
"forsworn his company hourly any time this two and"
"twenty years, and yet I am bewitched with the"
"rogue's company. If the rascal hath not given me"
"medicines to make me love him, I'll be hanged, it"
"could not be else: I have drunk medicines. Poins!"
"Hal! a plague upon you both! Bardolph! Peto!"
"I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further. An 'twere"
"not as good a deed as drink, to turn true man and to"
"leave these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that"
"ever chewed with a tooth. Eight yards of uneven"
"ground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me,"
"and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough:"
"a plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another!"
"They whistle"
"Whew! A plague upon you all! Give me my horse, you"
"rogues, give me my horse, and be hanged!"
"Peace, ye fat-guts! lie down, lay thine ear close"
"to the ground and list if thou canst hear the tread"
"of travellers."
"Have you any levers to lift me up again, being down?"
"'Sblood, I'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot"
"again for all the coin in thy father's exchequer."
"What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?"
"Thou liest, thou art not colted, thou art uncolted."
"I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse,"
"good king's son."
"Out, ye rogue! shall I be your ostler?"
"Go, hang thyself in thine own heir-apparent"
"garters! If I be ta'en, I'll peach for this. An I"
"have not ballads made on you all and sung to filthy"
"tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison: when a jest"
"is so forward, and afoot too! I hate it."
"Enter GADSHILL, BARDOLPH and PETO"
Stand.
"So I do, against my will."
"O, 'tis our setter: I know his voice. Bardolph,"
"what news?"
"Case ye, case ye, on with your vizards: there 's"
"money of the king's coming down the hill, 'tis going"
"to the king's exchequer."
"You lie, ye rogue, 'tis going to the king's tavern."
"There's enough to make us all."
"To be hanged."
"Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane,"
"Ned Poins and I will walk lower: if they 'scape"
"from your encounter, then they light on us."
"How many be there of them?"
"Some eight or ten."
"'Zounds, will they not rob us?"
"What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?"
"Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather,"
"but yet no coward, Hal."
"Well, we leave that to the proof."
"Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge:"
"when thou needest him, there thou shalt find him."
"Farewell, and stand fast."
"Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged."
"Ned, where are our disguises?"
"Here, hard by: stand close."
"Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and POINS"
"Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I:"
"every man to his business."
"Enter the Travellers"
"Come, neighbour: the boy shall lead our horses down"
"the hill, we'll walk afoot awhile, and ease our legs."
Stand!
"Jesus bless us!"
"Strike, down with them, cut the villains' throats:"
"ah! whoreson caterpillars! bacon-fed knaves! they"
"hate us youth: down with them: fleece them."
"O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever!"
"Hang ye, gorbellied knaves, are ye undone? No, ye"
"fat chuffs: I would your store were here! On,"
"bacons, on! What, ye knaves! young men must live."
"You are Grand-jurors, are ye? we'll jure ye, 'faith."
"Here they rob them and bind them. Exeunt"
"Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS"
"The thieves have bound the true men. Now could thou"
"and I rob the thieves and go merrily to London, it"
"would be argument for a week, laughter for a month"
"and a good jest for ever."
"Stand close, I hear them coming."
"Enter the Thieves again"
"Come, my masters, let us share, and then to  horse"
"before day. An the Prince and Poins be not two"
"arrant cowards, there's no equity stirring: there's"
"no more valour in that Poins than in a wild-duck."
"Your money!"
Villains!
"As they are sharing, the Prince and Poins set upon  them, they all run away, and Falstaff, after a blow or two, runs away too, leaving the booty behind them"
"Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse:"
"The thieves are all scatter'd and possess'd with fear"
"So strongly that they dare not meet each other,"
"Each takes his fellow for an officer."
"Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death,"
"And lards the lean earth as he walks along:"
"Were 't not for laughing, I should pity him."
"How the rogue roar'd!"
Exeunt