"SCENE III. Warkworth castle"
"Enter HOTSPUR, solus, reading a letter"
"'But for mine own part, my lord, I could be well"
"contented to be there, in respect of the love I bear"
"your house.' He could be contented: why is he not,"
"then? In respect of the love he bears our house:"
"he shows in this, he loves his own barn better than"
"he loves our house. Let me see some more. 'The"
"purpose you undertake is dangerous,'--why, that's"
"certain: 'tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to"
"drink, but I tell you, my lord fool, out of this"
"nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety. 'The"
"purpose you undertake is dangerous, the friends you"
"have named uncertain, the time itself unsorted, and"
"your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so"
"great an opposition.' Say you so, say you so? I say"
"unto you again, you are a shallow cowardly hind, and"
"you lie.  What a lack-brain is this! By the Lord,"
"our plot is a good plot as ever was laid, our"
"friends true and constant: a good plot, good"
"friends, and full of expectation, an excellent plot,"
"very good friends. What a frosty-spirited rogue is"
"this! Why, my lord of York commends the plot and the"
"general course of action. 'Zounds, an I were now by"
"this rascal, I could brain him with his lady's fan."
"Is there not my father, my uncle and myself? lord"
"Edmund Mortimer, My lord of York and Owen Glendower?"
"is there not besides the Douglas? have I not all"
"their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the"
"next month? and are they not some of them set"
"forward already? What a pagan rascal is this! an"
"infidel! Ha! you shall see now in very sincerity"
"of fear and cold heart, will he to the king and lay"
"open all our proceedings. O, I could divide myself"
"and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of"
"skim milk with so honourable an action! Hang him!"
"let him tell the king: we are prepared. I will set"
"forward to-night."
"Enter LADY PERCY"
"How now, Kate! I must leave you within these two hours."
"O, my good lord, why are you thus alone?"
"For what offence have I this fortnight been"
"A banish'd woman from my Harry's bed?"
"Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from thee"
"Thy stomach, pleasure and thy golden sleep?"
"Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,"
"And start so often when thou sit'st alone?"
"Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks,"
"And given my treasures and my rights of thee"
"To thick-eyed musing and cursed melancholy?"
"In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd,"
"And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,"
"Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,"
"Cry 'Courage! to the field!' And thou hast talk'd"
"Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,"
"Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,"
"Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin,"
"Of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain,"
"And all the currents of a heady fight."
"Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war"
"And thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep,"
"That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow"
"Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream,"
"And in thy face strange motions have appear'd,"
"Such as we see when men restrain their breath"
"On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these?"
"Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,"
"And I must know it, else he loves me not."
"What, ho!"
"Enter Servant"
"Is Gilliams with the packet gone?"
"He is, my lord, an hour ago."
"Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?"
"One horse, my lord, he brought even now."
"What horse? a roan, a crop-ear, is it not?"
"It is, my lord."
"That roan shall by my throne."
"Well, I will back him straight: O esperance!"
"Bid Butler lead him forth into the park."
"Exit Servant"
"But hear you, my lord."
"What say'st thou, my lady?"
"What is it carries you away?"
"Why, my horse, my love, my horse."
"Out, you mad-headed ape!"
"A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen"
"As you are toss'd with. In faith,"
"I'll know your business, Harry, that I will."
"I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir"
"About his title, and hath sent for you"
"To line his enterprise: but if you go,--"
"So far afoot, I shall be weary, love."
"Come, come, you paraquito, answer me"
"Directly unto this question that I ask:"
"In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,"
"An if thou wilt not tell me all things true."
Away,
"Away, you trifler! Love! I love thee not,"
"I care not for thee, Kate: this is no world"
"To play with mammets and to tilt with lips:"
"We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns,"
"And pass them current too. God's me, my horse!"
"What say'st thou, Kate? what would'st thou"
"have with me?"
"Do you not love me? do you not, indeed?"
"Well, do not then, for since you love me not,"
"I will not love myself. Do you not love me?"
"Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no."
"Come, wilt thou see me ride?"
"And when I am on horseback, I will swear"
"I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate,"
"I must not have you henceforth question me"
"Whither I go, nor reason whereabout:"
"Whither I must, I must, and, to conclude,"
"This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate."
"I know you wise, but yet no farther wise"
"Than Harry Percy's wife: constant you are,"
"But yet a woman: and for secrecy,"
"No lady closer, for I well believe"
"Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,"
"And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate."
"How! so far?"
"Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate:"
"Whither I go, thither shall you go too,"
"To-day will I set forth, to-morrow you."
"Will this content you, Kate?"
"It must of force."
Exeunt
"SCENE IV. The Boar's-Head Tavern, Eastcheap."
"Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS"
"Ned, prithee, come out of that fat room, and lend me"
"thy hand to laugh a little."
"Where hast been, Hal?"
"With three or four loggerheads amongst three or four"
"score hogsheads. I have sounded the very"
"base-string of humility. Sirrah, I am sworn brother"
"to a leash of drawers, and can call them all by"
"their christen names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis."
"They take it already upon their salvation, that"
"though I be but the prince of Wales, yet I am king"
"of courtesy, and tell me flatly I am no proud Jack,"
"like Falstaff, but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a"
"good boy, by the Lord, so they call me, and when I"
"am king of England, I shall command all the good"
"lads in Eastcheap. They call drinking deep, dyeing"
"scarlet, and when you breathe in your watering, they"
"cry  'hem!' and bid you play it off. To conclude, I"
"am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour,"
"that I can drink with any tinker in his own language"
"during my life. I tell thee, Ned, thou hast lost"
"much honour, that thou wert not with me in this sweet"
"action. But, sweet Ned,--to sweeten which name of"
"Ned, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapped"
"even now into my hand by an under-skinker, one that"
"never spake other English in his life than 'Eight"
"shillings and sixpence' and 'You are welcome,' with"
"this shrill addition, 'Anon, anon, sir! Score a pint"
"of bastard in the Half-Moon,' or so. But, Ned, to"
"drive away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee,"
"do thou stand in some by-room, while I question my"
"puny drawer to what end he gave me the sugar, and do"
"thou never leave calling 'Francis,' that his tale"
"to me may be nothing but 'Anon.' Step aside, and"
"I'll show thee a precedent."
Francis!
"Thou art perfect."
Francis!
"Exit POINS"
"Enter FRANCIS"
"Anon, anon, sir. Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph."
"Come hither, Francis."
"My lord?"
"How long hast thou to serve, Francis?"
"Forsooth, five years, and as much as to--"
"[Within]  Francis!"
"Anon, anon, sir."
"Five year! by'r lady, a long lease for the clinking"
"of pewter. But, Francis, darest thou be so valiant"
"as to play the coward with thy indenture and show it"
"a fair pair of heels and run from it?"
"O Lord, sir, I'll be sworn upon all the books in"
"England, I could find in my heart."
"[Within]  Francis!"
"Anon, sir."
"How old art thou, Francis?"
"Let me see--about Michaelmas next I shall be--"
"[Within]  Francis!"
"Anon, sir. Pray stay a little, my lord."
"Nay, but hark you, Francis: for the sugar thou"
"gavest me,'twas a pennyworth, wast't not?"
"O Lord, I would it had been two!"
"I will give thee for it a thousand pound: ask me"
"when thou wilt, and thou shalt have it."
"[Within]  Francis!"
"Anon, anon."
"Anon, Francis? No, Francis, but to-morrow, Francis,"
"or, Francis, o' Thursday, or indeed, Francis, when"
"thou wilt. But, Francis!"
"My lord?"
"Wilt thou rob this leathern jerkin, crystal-button,"
"not-pated, agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter,"
"smooth-tongue, Spanish-pouch,--"
"O Lord, sir, who do you mean?"
"Why, then, your brown bastard is your only drink,"
"for look you, Francis, your white canvas doublet"
"will sully: in Barbary, sir, it cannot come to so much."
"What, sir?"
"[Within]  Francis!"
"Away, you rogue! dost thou not hear them call?"
"Here they both call him, the drawer stands amazed, not knowing which way to go"
"Enter Vintner"
"What, standest thou still, and hearest such a"
"calling? Look to the guests within."
"Exit Francis"
"My lord, old Sir John, with half-a-dozen more, are"
"at the door: shall I let them in?"
"Let them alone awhile, and then open the door."
"Exit Vintner"
Poins!
"Re-enter POINS"
"Anon, anon, sir."
"Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at"
"the door: shall we be merry?"
"As merry as crickets, my lad. But hark ye, what"
"cunning match have you made with this jest of the"
"drawer? come, what's the issue?"
"I am now of all humours that have showed themselves"
"humours since the old days of goodman Adam to the"
"pupil age of this present twelve o'clock at midnight."
"Re-enter FRANCIS"
"What's o'clock, Francis?"
"Anon, anon, sir."
Exit
"That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a"
"parrot, and yet the son of a woman! His industry is"
"upstairs and downstairs, his eloquence the parcel of"
"a reckoning. I am not yet of Percy's mind, the"
"Hotspur of the north, he that kills me some six or"
"seven dozen of Scots at a breakfast, washes his"
"hands, and says to his wife 'Fie upon this quiet"
"life! I want work.' 'O my sweet Harry,' says she,"
"'how many hast thou killed to-day?' 'Give my roan"
"horse a drench,' says he, and answers 'Some"
"fourteen,' an hour after, 'a trifle, a trifle.' I"
"prithee, call in Falstaff: I'll play Percy, and"
"that damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer his"
"wife. 'Rivo!' says the drunkard. Call in ribs, call in tallow."
"Enter FALSTAFF, GADSHILL, BARDOLPH, and PETO, FRANCIS following with wine"
"Welcome, Jack: where hast thou been?"
"A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too!"
"marry, and amen! Give me a cup of sack, boy. Ere I"
"lead this life long, I'll sew nether stocks and mend"
"them and foot them too. A plague of all cowards!"
"Give me a cup of sack, rogue. Is there no virtue extant?"
"He drinks"
"Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter?"
"pitiful-hearted Titan, that melted at the sweet tale"
"of the sun's! if thou didst, then behold that compound."
"You rogue, here's lime in this sack too: there is"
"nothing but roguery to be found in villanous man:"
"yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack with lime"
"in it. A villanous coward! Go thy ways, old Jack,"
"die when thou wilt, if manhood, good manhood, be"
"not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a"
"shotten herring. There live not three good men"
"unhanged in England, and one of them is fat and"
"grows old: God help the while! a bad world, I say."
"I would I were a weaver, I could sing psalms or any"
"thing. A plague of all cowards, I say still."
"How now, wool-sack! what mutter you?"
"A king's son! If I do not beat thee out of thy"
"kingdom with a dagger of lath, and drive all thy"
"subjects afore thee like a flock of wild-geese,"
"I'll never wear hair on my face more. You Prince of Wales!"
"Why, you whoreson round man, what's the matter?"
"Are not you a coward? answer me to that: and Poins there?"
"'Zounds, ye fat paunch, an ye call me coward, by the"
"Lord, I'll stab thee."
"I call thee coward! I'll see thee damned ere I call"
"thee coward: but I would give a thousand pound I"
"could run as fast as thou canst. You are straight"
"enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your"
"back: call you that backing of your friends? A"
"plague upon such backing! give me them that will"
"face me. Give me a cup of sack: I am a rogue, if I"
"drunk to-day."
"O villain! thy lips are scarce wiped since thou"
"drunkest last."
"All's one for that."
"He drinks"
"A plague of all cowards, still say I."
"What's the matter?"
"What's the matter! there be four of us here have"
"ta'en a thousand pound this day morning."
"Where is it, Jack? where is it?"
"Where is it! taken from us it is: a hundred upon"
"poor four of us."
"What, a hundred, man?"
"I am a rogue, if I were not at half-sword with a"
"dozen of them two hours together. I have 'scaped by"
"miracle. I am eight times thrust through the"
"doublet, four through the hose, my buckler cut"
"through and through, my sword hacked like a"
"hand-saw--ecce signum! I never dealt better since"
"I was a man: all would not do. A plague of all"
"cowards! Let them speak: if they speak more or"
"less than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness."
"Speak, sirs, how was it?"
"We four set upon some dozen--"
"Sixteen at least, my lord."
"And bound them."
"No, no, they were not bound."
"You rogue, they were bound, every man of them, or I"
"am a Jew else, an Ebrew Jew."
"As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us--"
"And unbound the rest, and then come in the other."
"What, fought you with them all?"
"All! I know not what you call all, but if I fought"
"not with fifty of them, I am a bunch of radish: if"
"there were not two or three and fifty upon poor old"
"Jack, then am I no two-legged creature."
"Pray God you have not murdered some of them."
"Nay, that's past praying for: I have peppered two"
"of them, two I am sure I have paid, two rogues"
"in buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell"
"thee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse. Thou"
"knowest my old ward, here I lay and thus I bore my"
"point. Four rogues in buckram let drive at me--"
"What, four? thou saidst but two even now."
"Four, Hal, I told thee four."
"Ay, ay, he said four."
"These four came all a-front, and mainly thrust at"
"me. I made me no more ado but took all their seven"
"points in my target, thus."
"Seven? why, there were but four even now."
"In buckram?"
"Ay, four, in buckram suits."
"Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else."
"Prithee, let him alone, we shall have more anon."
"Dost thou hear me, Hal?"
"Ay, and mark thee too, Jack."
"Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These nine"
"in buckram that I told thee of--"
"So, two more already."
"Their points being broken,--"
"Down fell their hose."
"Began to give me ground: but I followed me close,"
"came in foot and hand, and with a thought seven of"
"the eleven I paid."
"O monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two!"
"But, as the devil would have it, three misbegotten"
"knaves in Kendal green came at my back and let drive"
"at me, for it was so dark, Hal, that thou couldst"
"not see thy hand."
"These lies are like their father that begets them,"
"gross as a mountain, open, palpable. Why, thou"
"clay-brained guts, thou knotty-pated fool, thou"
"whoreson, obscene, grease tallow-catch,--"
"What, art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth"
"the truth?"
"Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal"
"green, when it was so dark thou couldst not see thy"
"hand? come, tell us your reason: what sayest thou to this?"
"Come, your reason, Jack, your reason."
"What, upon compulsion? 'Zounds, an I were at the"
"strappado, or all the racks in the world, I would"
"not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on"
"compulsion! If reasons were as plentiful as"
"blackberries, I would give no man a reason upon"
"compulsion, I."
"I'll be no longer guilty of this sin, this sanguine"
"coward, this bed-presser, this horseback-breaker,"
"this huge hill of flesh,--"
"'Sblood, you starveling, you elf-skin, you dried"
"neat's tongue, you bull's pizzle, you stock-fish! O"
"for breath to utter what is like thee! you"
"tailor's-yard, you sheath, you bowcase, you vile"
standing-tuck,--
"Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again: and"
"when thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons,"
"hear me speak but this."
"Mark, Jack."
"We two saw you four set on four and bound them, and"
"were masters of their wealth. Mark now, how a plain"
"tale shall put you down. Then did we two set on you"
"four, and, with a word, out-faced you from your"
"prize, and have it, yea, and can show it you here in"
"the house: and, Falstaff, you carried your guts"
"away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roared"
"for mercy and still run and roared, as ever I heard"
"bull-calf. What a slave art thou, to hack thy sword"
"as thou hast done, and then say it was in fight!"
"What trick, what device, what starting-hole, canst"
"thou now find out to hide thee from this open and"
"apparent shame?"
"Come, let's hear, Jack, what trick hast thou now?"
"By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye."
"Why, hear you, my masters: was it for me to kill the"
"heir-apparent? should I turn upon the true prince?"
"why, thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules: but"
"beware instinct, the lion will not touch the true"
"prince. Instinct is a great matter, I was now a"
"coward on instinct. I shall think the better of"
"myself and thee during my life, I for a valiant"
"lion, and thou for a true prince. But, by the Lord,"
"lads, I am glad you have the money. Hostess, clap"
"to the doors: watch to-night, pray to-morrow."
"Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles"
"of good fellowship come to you! What, shall we be"
"merry? shall we have a play extempore?"
"Content, and the argument shall be thy running away."
"Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!"
"Enter Hostess"
"O Jesu, my lord the prince!"
"How now, my lady the hostess! what sayest thou to"
me?
"Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court at"
"door would speak with you: he says he comes from"
"your father."
"Give him as much as will make him a royal man, and"
"send him back again to my mother."
"What manner of man is he?"
"An old man."
"What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? Shall"
"I give him his answer?"
"Prithee, do, Jack."
"'Faith, and I'll send him packing."
"Exit FALSTAFF"
"Now, sirs: by'r lady, you fought fair, so did you,"
"Peto, so did you, Bardolph: you are lions too, you"
"ran away upon instinct, you will not touch the true"
"prince, no, fie!"
"'Faith, I ran when I saw others run."
"'Faith, tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaff's"
"sword so hacked?"
"Why, he hacked it with his dagger, and said he would"
"swear truth out of England but he would make you"
"believe it was done in fight, and persuaded us to do the like."
"Yea, and to tickle our noses with spear-grass to"
"make them bleed, and then to beslubber our garments"
"with it and swear it was the blood of true men. I"
"did that I did not this seven year before, I blushed"
"to hear his monstrous devices."
"O villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years"
"ago, and wert taken with the manner, and ever since"
"thou hast blushed extempore. Thou hadst fire and"
"sword on thy side, and yet thou rannest away: what"
"instinct hadst thou for it?"
"My lord, do you see these meteors? do you behold"
"these exhalations?"
"I do."
"What think you they portend?"
"Hot livers and cold purses."
"Choler, my lord, if rightly taken."
"No, if rightly taken, halter."
"Re-enter FALSTAFF"
"Here comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone."
"How now, my sweet creature of bombast!"
"How long is't ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?"
"My own knee! when I was about thy years, Hal, I was"
"not an eagle's talon in the waist, I could have"
"crept into any alderman's thumb-ring: a plague of"
"sighing and grief! it blows a man up like a"
"bladder. There's villanous news abroad: here was"
"Sir John Bracy from your father, you must to the"