The playfield has many other lessons to give and to be learnt. The performance of a team game depends upon the cooperation and the joint, concerted effort of all the players. If any of the links are weak or is not performing as well as it should the total effort fails. In the game of football, hockey, rugby or basketball the central forward of the team can only score a goal if the left and right wings give him the right to support a proper and timely pass. If the one on the defence position fails to check the advancing forward player of the opposite team the chances of scoring of a goal brighten up. Many goals are saved by the alertness, agility and foresight of the goalkeeper.


Sports is such an activity that it can be taken up by anyone; at any age and any point in life. Adults, children and elders – everyone alike can take part in sports. Many regard sports as a mere co-curricular or extra-curricular activity in schools. However, in reality, sports play an equally important role as does education in a person’s life. To achieve overall and all-round development in life, one should be well-versed in both sports and culture. While training sharpens the mind, sports sharpens the body and fitness. Thus, both are essential.

There are numerous advantages of involving oneself in sports. First and foremost, as known by all and very definitively, competitions increase the physical fitness of an individual. Additionally, sports also contribute to building stable mental well-being of a person. Various researchers show that people who are in the daily practice of sports in any form record better mental as well as physical health. Moreover, sports also eliminates the risk of a person catching diseases or facing any bodily interruptions. Competitions increase immunity and increase people’s stamina.

It is not one but all who have to coordinate to gain a win. This team spirit learnt on the playfield teach them the value of mutual trust, mutual goodwill and mutual help lessons learnt on the field are lessons learnt for life in life’s every field and every venture. Jointly man can work wonders; a joint effort is a keynote to success.

Individual events give the mind training in concentration and determination to win these two lessons if followed in life, can bring success in any field.

Thus games and sports have lessons to teach, have thought to be valued and worked upon they educate the mind in their own way for success in life. They are equally as important as what we leam in a classroom.
 
Sports also influence the life expectancy of people, increasing the potential years to live of an average human individual. All of us are associated with games somehow or the other in our lives. While at schools and as kids, we were exposed to sports in various forms. However, since many institutions do not make it obligatory to pursue sports in higher academics, some of us are dissociated from its practice. However, a lot of people take up games further, on their own accord. Some people even decide on pursuing a career in the field.

A lot of people take up a lot of different kinds of sporting activities. There are many outdoor sports; these include cricket, badminton, football, hockey, volleyball etc. Indoor sports such as various board games, table tennis, chess etc. are also popular. One can choose from a large variety. While outdoor sports contribute heavily in building the physical aspect of one’s being, indoor games have a more psychological impact. However, none of the activities can be categorised in a hard and fast way. Every sporting activity contributes to the well- being of a person, both physically and mentally.
Similarly, in the game of cricket, the bowler, the fielders each one has a very crucial part to play and it is on his performance that the result of the match would depend. The batsman needs to have the due concentration and the ability to strike or deflect the ball in the right proper manner and direction. This is all about team games.

In such games as tennis or badminton or squash or chess, in a singles match, the total concentration of the player’s mind and his ability to cash on the weak points of his opponent alone can make him win. In field sports, the races, the hurdles, swimming, and in the event of throws, the full use of one’s alertness and agility and the full use of one’s power puts him or her at the top of the victory stand.

So what does all this mean? Games and Sports train a player or a sportsman to keep himself fully fit in body and mind. To do well in a team event the spirit to cooperate and to conjoin efforts gives the mind training in the art of cooperation, adjustment and accord. That is why they are called ‘Team Games’.

 
Sports also builds several characteristics and personality traits in a person. Sports instils a sense of confidence and enthusiasm in an individual’s attitude. People who are involved in regular sports practices show qualities of leadership, team-work and excellence in their personalities and behaviour. Sports makes one competitive, however in a healthy manner. It also helps us to deal with failure and enables us to work hard in achieving our respective goals.

These are all just a few good qualities that sports brings us into our lives. There are many other attributes that games have. Hence, we should all engage actively and more frequently in sports and other physical activities. It instils discipline in us, makes us active, energetic and increases our mental, emotional and physical state