Sports and games make you more fit. They make your muscles stronger and keep the bones, heart, and lungs in good condition. When you play sports regularly, you use up the fatty molecules. It implies that you have less chance of blood clotting and heart attack. Physical games are the natural healer for the obesity menace. At least now, we should make sports a mandatory part of the curriculum in schools and colleges. Once people enjoy playing, they may not go for exercise routines to decrease weight. Children who learn to play sports become active adults.
 
Players are not afraid of losing a game. Sportspeople can accept rejections and defeats better. Similarly, they do not get carried away by their victories. They understand that success and failure are both part of the game. Life becomes a lot easier when a similar thought process is applied to all aspects.
Playing games increase concentration power. The more you practice, the higher the potential of your brain. You become good at decision making. You are ready to take up challenging subjects. Therefore, sportspeople can study faster and are good at solving logical and analytical problems. Moreover, sports teach you the value of time. Students who play sports do not waste their precious time in gossiping and fault-finding.

One of the main problems in the present hyper-connected world is loneliness. Our social media presence seems dubious, and people have fake friendliness. While playing, people have a delightful time together and develop a healthy social life too.
 
For students, sports are a source of recreation. They help in breaking the monotony of academic studies. Serious sports require intense training. Thus, sportspeople have a proper way to channelize their energy. By actively participating in games, one can balance his mood well and is likely to experience less stress in life.
People who play in national teams, often travel abroad for their games. They get to experience different cultures and have a broader mind. They become more exploring in nature. These qualities can make you a global citizen. With more people in sports, our communities are more open to experiments. From a business point of view, it makes the country more attractive to foreign investors.

At the highest levels, games are held among various countries. It represents the progress of the nation. When a national team wins the World cup in sports like football or cricket, the entire country is in a celebration mood. People forget their regional differences and unite as citizens of the country.
Unfortunately, sporting events and organizations are marred with rampant corruption in our country. The politicians and administrative officials need to understand the national significance of sports.
The present government launched the Khelo India scheme last year. Under this program, many sporting events are conducted across the nation. It encourages the mass participation of students in the games. The primary purpose of the scheme is to identify talented people and train them adequately. We also require the sportspeople to have other sources of income as they retire. 
With so many advantages and impacts, it is high time that we realize the importance of sports and games. We need to make sports mandatory in schools. We should give up the attitude of looking at games period as a break from studies. Students should have both supervised and unsupervised games classes. It is for creating a natural inclination towards games while supervised courses can help us identify the right talent and groom them early.  
Sport is an excellent way to improve our health and lift up our attitude no matter it is team sports or individual sports. I myself always enjoy group activities where I can feel being a part of something. That is why I love team sports.
The first benefit of the team sport is you learn how to do a teamwork. You learn that it is not only you who can make a great achievement but how you can support other people to make the best team. You become more responsible for the result of the whole team. If you watch a football match, you expect all the players to cooperate with each other, do the good passes to each other, helping each other to score. And when you win, it is an enormous joy for all the members because all of them see their roles for the win.


Further more, if you play a team sport, you learn how to discipline yourself at a high level. When your group practice, you need to practice with them. It is not you to decide where and when you want to play or practice. Your performance really effects on the whole team. So it is a very good way to improve our self-discipline

One of the best reason I love team sport is the sprit of a team and the encouragement between all members. I love to play tennis. Even though I can play on my own but It is always good to have a partner to play with me who motivate and inspire me to keep trying which I hardly do myself when I feel so lazy or so down.

However, I have friends who are great in individual sport. They love being on their own and decide where and when they can practice. They don’t have to wait for the whole team to make a decision. They don’t have to wait for the whole team to vote for their plan or their strategy.They are the one who also decides the result. Their performance doesn’t affect much on other people. That is much more comfortable.

It seems to me that individual sport has a higher competitive level. People who enjoy this kind of sport train themselves to fight on their own and they get credit for their own if they win. The feeling “I am the best” is always thrilling and desiring in each of human being.

It depends much on the personality and the condition that people choose either team sports or individuals sport. I myself love to have partners in all the activities. So team sport is always my choice.
Team sports teach the value of responsibility. Punctuality must be maintained for practices and games. Team members are required to arrive at specific times before a game or practice. Punctuality requires time management in order to arrive prepared and on time. This is an extremely important component children will need when they get a job. Likewise, good judgment is required in team sports. A basketball player may need to make quick decisions, such as whether to go to the basket or pass the ball to another player. In many jobs, quick decisions like this also need to be made. The sense of responsibility children develop through team sports benefit them as adults.

Furthermore, team sports develop interpersonal skills. They teach children how to communicate with others. In sports such as football, players have to discuss plays or plans with other team mates. As adults, instead of communicating with other players and coaches, they have to communicate their opinions and ideas with other employees or employers. Team sports also teach conflict resolution skills. Two players may disagree on a play or plan, causing an argument. Eventually, they have to work together to come to an agreement that satisfies each player. In the workplace, two employees may not agree with each other and have to collaborate their ideas in order to resolve the conflict. Social skills that children develop while participating in team sports are useful for when they enter the workforce.
Moreover, team sports promote a healthy lifestyle.
