From the evidence of the history, dangerous sports have been more preferred by people than other competitions. Despite this fact, some people hold the opinion that these deadly sports should be banned as they may hurt athlete’s health and even ruin their lives. I disagree with this view and believe that such sports can easing international tensions and bring people together.

Firs of all, the history has shown that extreme competitions could even interrupt battles and nations together to stadiums. From the ancient world, when Greeks and Romans would leave battlefields to participate in the gladiators games. To the modern politics disputes, when athletes from Israel and Palestine would forget their differences and compete fair and peacefully in martial games. Moreover, these sports usually attract the world’s attention that could force leaders to stop their disputes and review options to make partnerships with the opponents.

Secondly, dangerous sports can bring people with different background together. For example, my country is a multicultural one, but, people are still divided into ethnical groups. However, MMI fights is a national sport and people with different culture and believes would support together our sportsmen and sportswomen during the season. It is clear that these competitions greatly benefit our community teaching the citizens tolerance.

Nevertheless, it is impossible to ignore arguments against dangerous sports. It is obvious that there is a huge risk for athletes, but the event organizers could improve rules and safety equipment to reduce this risk and to make such sports less dangerous.

In conclusion, banning dangerous sports can bring more disadvantages than benefits. In my opinion, we should focus on improving facilities, standards and rules for these sports to minimize the risk.
Each year international sports events held through out the world.Through out the history it can be seen that they bring together people belonging from different cultures and regions. I certainly agree that these sports events such as football world cup and cricket tournaments not only helps in improving international relationships between different countries but also help people in expressing devotion to their country and promote nationalism.

Generally in every geographical regions there are few nations that have disputes and they don't enjoy good diplomatic relations. Undoubtedly these sports competitions bring close together inhabitants of these countries. They get know positive aspects of each others that are mostly concealed by their government and media. For Instance India and Pakistan have tremendous diplomatic differences and also fought three wars but despite of this when international cricket series held each year it brings both nations close to each others. They support their favorite players and team irrespective of their nationality. And this type of sport events proved enormously beneficial in easing tension between two countries in last few decades.

Moreover these international events attract tourists from all over the world, which not only bring enormous revenue to hosting country but at the same time allow locals to learn from people of different cultural backgrounds. It also alleviate hostility between people belonging from different countries.Furthermore when people support their teams it rises their patriotic emotions and bring them together as a nation.

To sum up, international sport events such as Olympics and Fifa world cups are not only very beneficial for boosting international relations but also liberate patriotic feelings.