Sports and gaming activities are commonly introduced to students in schools. These games are entertaining and offer some respite from the boring classes. Several students take up sports activities from childhood. They want to excel in those games. There are two types of sports activities – indoor and outdoor.

Outdoor sports activities include sports that exercise the body—these sports activities are basketball, cricket, football, table tennis, tennis, hockey. Basketball, tennis are sports activities. Games cam includes going outdoors or staying indoors. Indoor games are chess, ludo, or board games. Board games include scrabble, Chinese checker, UNO, and other card games. Card games like UNO are very helpful for keeping the children engaged. Playing with building blocks is also a part of indoor gaming.

Everything can be a competition sans physical prowess and level of difficulty. Hence eating contests and pissing contests or even staring contests. What do those have in common? You can't stop the other contestants from getting their score. But sport means we are actively engaged with each other, be it mentally or physically and ideally both. But track and field, golf, bowling, and marksmanship, does not have that engagement aspect. While there are physical (marksmanship is a stretch), ine can not stop the others from getting their score. And when I can't stop you from scoring your score like in track and field, golf, bowling, etc. we are just in a competition, no different than an eating contest. Hell golfer even tee off at different times and we see gymnast having to wait for others to perform to see if they won or lost. Just like a dance competition. And nothing is more physically demanding than a dance competition or requires high levels of skill, yet we never call it a sport...
 
Some games that originated in India require immense strength. These games include Kabaddi. In Middle Eastern Countries, cockfighting is a game. Games and sports are peculiar and often interesting from all over the world. Bullfighting was considered o be a sport until the late 20th century. There are some adventure sports that can be listed too. These include Scuba Diving, Deep Sea Diving, and Coral Reef explorations. Mountaineering is also a famous adventure sport.
Sports activities can be listed. Cycling is a sport. There are several people who indulge themselves in long cycle rides. The cycle rides for long distances are taken up as a sports activity by many. Running is also a sport. Running long distances can improve mind and body coordination. Running releases feel-good hormones and makes the runner feel good about oneself. Exercising is also an activity that can be considered a sport.

There can be various kinds of strenuous or light exercises. High-Intensity Interval Training, Weight lifting are all exercises. These are also port activities. So it is essential for the body to take up some kind of sports activity. Games are played to improve the mental well being of individuals. Researchers have been correlating mental well being with going outdoor since ages. There is still ongoing work being done on the positive impact of sports on health and fitness.
This paragraph will be helpful to help the readers know about the benefits of sports activities. We will first start with the health benefits of sports activities. Engaging oneself in sports and games means a positive recreation. It reduces stress and increases metabolism. Sports activities are known to reduce obesity among teens and adults. There are several sports activities that require a lot of muscle strength, like Javelin or Short Put.

There are games that require mind and body coordination, and they include games like cricket and baseball. Baseball is mostly played abroad in America and Japan. Cricket is famous in most of the countries that were once under British Colonialism. These include Australia, India, and West Indies. If one does not want to get involved in outdoor games, then indoor games are for them. A move out of the sedentary life is essential.
My working definition of a sport is "any competitive event in which one side is actively engaged in stopping the other side from scoring". This eliminates a lot of track and field competitions as well as a lot of gymnastics and ice events. As they are great physical feats, but the other competitors are not actively engaged in stopping the other from scoring. This also eliminates golf and archery or markmanship events as they are all conducted with no way of your opponents to stop you. Rugby, cricket and tennis are great examples of sports as the opponent has a means to stop you from scoring and you can stop them from scoring as well.

 
There are several indoor games present. Indoor games include chess, ludo, Chinese checker, and monopoly. There are several card games that can also be played for fun and activity. These card games include hearts, bridge, 29, and several other games of chance. Chess is a game that calls for a tremendous amount of patience. It requires eh complete concentration of the player. So there are several benefits for the mind in the case of Indoor as well as outdoor games. It increases the mindfulness f individuals and reduces stress and anxiety. Several doctors suggest taking up sports activities to those that are suffering from depression and severe stress and anxiety.


Banning dangerous sports, such as motocross, bull run, hose riding is a controversial tropics from last few decades, but those dangerous sports failures are really horrible and critical, so that I will argue , life threatening sports have to be banded


Human life is unique resource to the world, so it should not be lost or disable by themself by doing dangerous sports, even dangerous sports not only put contesters life in risk, it makes contester’s family miserable and sometime it cause to damage the non relevant lives also, so having those points in to account, I strongly agree to ban the dangerous sports to save valuable human lives
Whether it is a sport match or an academic test, competition has always been a preponderance part of life and it contribute to immense pressure for all ages; consequently, there is no escape from rivalry. From my point of view, l strongly disagree with this argument that prohibiting adolescents from participating in sport competition for the sake of alleviating emotional stress.

To start out, restriction in certain activity cannot prevent from emotional distress or intellectual involvement, or promoting another skills. Broadly speaking, studies have shown students who do not associate in competition are vulnerable than some of whom are active in sport events. To be more specific, pressurized sport condition not only make them stronger against tough situation in future but also it shape their characters so sociable. As a case in point, if they be a member of Football, volleyball or basketball team at school or be a individual sport they would learn team working, respect for the rival and understanding concept of defeat and triumph; furthermore, they would enjoy better mental and emotional health.

In conjunction with the influence of participating in competition the undeniable role of physical fitness improvement should not be underestimated when this issue is dealt with. Generally put, apart from health benefits that sport activities brings for them, physical health and fitness is one of the most substantial factors for mental and intellectual health. To illuminate, regular as well as professional exercise in order to improve physical fitness and motivation is indispensable for participating in competition. it is a immense discrepancies between youngsters that cause make them so successful in education and life.

To conclude, as far as I am personally concerned, there is no justification for banning adolescents form participating in sport competition. Notwithstanding the high level of stress in this events, the advantages is so remarkable than disadvantages.
Children who are involved in sports are seen to be more proactive in class activities. Several children take up sports seriously in their children. The physical training classes that are enjoyed in the schools and colleges are to imbibe on the students a love for sports. The outdoors is an extremely important part of our lives. We must embrace it. Sports and games are two ways to express it. Games can be played indoors. Even working with building blocks or legos can be considered as a game. Hide and Seek is also a game. There are several other indoor games.