Sports helps build talent and hobbies so that the people can be better at delivering them for personal and professional purposes.

Sports also serve as a good leisure activity meant to relieve one from physical and emotional stress hence a healthy living.

Through sports, people have established their careers as professional men and women in particular sports like athletes who are paid for their ability to do well in particular sports.

Sports are also used for promotional purposes where different brands use sports as a platform to market and advertise themselves.

Sports are a country’s brand. Different countries have been known for particular sports like for instance the Republic of India is known for cricket, Brazil for football and Kenya for athletics. Sports are in this way a special kind of signature and this helps in the preservation of the culture of that country.
The dominant view in the philosophy of sport maintains that sports constitute a true subset of games—in particular, that sports are competitive games that involve a physical component, such as physical exertion or the exercise of gross motor skills. This chapter argues that the dominant view is mistaken and proposes in its stead an account of sport as a thick cluster concept. Sport is a thick concept because it requires the application of what this chapter terms “warranted seriousness.” And it is a cluster concept because such features as game-ness (or contrivance), physicality, and competitiveness bear constitutively on whether an activity is a sport, but none of these factors is individually necessary. The chapter concludes by sketching possible implications of the thick cluster account of sport for normative questions regarding the virtue of sportsmanship and the proper interpretation of sport rules.
‘Sports’ is a broad term that basically refers to diverse forms of physical activities that are competitive in nature. Participation in sports is aimed at utilizing or maintaining, as well as improving one’s physical capabilities, as well as the skills of the game. Moreover, the individuals participating in certain sports activities, together with spectators, are entertained by this physical competition. Activities like football are effective in nurturing physical health and developing good interaction skills.

Historic artifacts suggest that the earliest sporting activities took place in China many centuries ago. At the time sports originated, gymnastics were the most popular kind of sport among people in ancient China. In the same way, suggestive artifacts were found in Egypt, with monuments indicating that traditional sports like fishing and swimming were well developed in the region. Correspondingly, ancient Persians were fond of martial arts, jousting, and polo. Another civilization that embraced sports was ancient Greece – the culture that was predominantly focused on sports. Greece played a crucial part in the development of sports. We all know the famous Olympic Games competition that was created in Greece.

For those who think about engaging in sport, the great news is that numerous sports exist today, which means you’re not going to have problems with picking one that suits you well. Some require two participants, while others involve larger groups or more individuals. Sports activities can be classified into two main categories, the broadest and most popular one being physical activities. For instance, physical sports include various activities that take place during the worldwide Olympic Games competitions. First Olympic Games were held in 1896 in Athens, and today the most famous competition typically includes thirty-three different sports, such as aquatics, weightlifting, wrestling, hockey, football, badminton, boxing, canoe, gymnastics, handball, judo, karate, sailing, shooting, and many others.
Suits is good on games, but bad on sports. Because he views sports as games, he has trouble accommodating the many sports that aren’t really games at all, like running, swimming, and rowing. More importantly, he mistakes the value of sport, suggesting that it derives from the challenges posed by the arbitrary rules that constitute games, when in truth it lies in the development and exercise of physical abilities. This paper argues that sport includes any activity whose central purpose is the exercise of physical skills, whether or not it is also a game, and that the value of sport derives from the intrinsic worth of such exercises.
In addition to physical games, sports also include mind games that are common among different generations. For example, chess, as well as bridge, have come to be recognized as special forms of sport. Nonetheless, not all mind games can be called sports. One criterion for consideration as a sport is that the activity should incorporate the so-called competitive element. Secondly, the activity should not cause harm to any living thing, and winning should not depend on luck.
In sports, an individual is expected to challenge another person or a team challenging another team. One team is always expected to win, mostly the better one. The main goal of sports is entertainment.

Importance of sports in education

Sports provide entertainment and in this way provide a distraction therefore taking people from the worries of the world momentarily.
It also brings people together irrespective of their ethnic backgrounds or age. In times of sports, people come together for the purpose of fun and enjoyment.
Sports open the mind of students to being susceptible to new ideas. Students consciously or unconsciously let go of mental hurdles and are open to learning.
Sports provide mental and physical therapy for learners and rejuvenate them in these parameters so that they can be in the best mental and physical position to be educated.
It serves as a means through which teachers and students can bond. Normally there is tension in the teacher-student relationship. Sports ease this tension and make their interaction friendly.
It also fosters the spirit of competition among learners and enhances the spit of winning as the learners are driven by the spirit to win in any sport.
