Any form of competitive physical activity that is governed by a set of well-defined rules can be termed a sport. Apart from recreational purposes, playing sports and games improve physical health and mental well-being. Some sports, when played at a professional level, attract a lot of attention from fans of the game and are considered to be a great source of entertainment. Sports promote athleticism, mental agility, and dexterity in players. Often, sports can also be a doorway to understanding one's culture.

Team Sports vs. Individual Sports
Sports and games can be classified into multiple types such as athletics, field games, motorized sports, adventure sports, and more. However, more broadly speaking, sports can be classified into individual sports and team sports. Football, basketball, baseball, soccer, volleyball, etc., are team sports as they involve competition between two teams. Each team comprises sets of players who play together as a team to win. Team sports instill team spirit, pride, and also promote the importance of collective effort in society. On the other hand, individual sports like boxing, swimming, tennis, badminton, golf, F1 racing, bowling, etc., involve multiple participants competing against each other for the ultimate goal of finishing in the first place. Individual sports boost self-esteem and improve focus. Some sports such as tennis fall under both individual as well as team sports. A game of tennis can be played between two individuals, but a tennis doubles game involves two players playing together as a team against another team of two players.

One of the major sporting events that garners a lot of attention is the Olympics. It involves multiple nations competing against each other with the quest for winning the gold, silver, and bronze medals through a series of sports and games. FIFA World Cup, Rugby World Cup, Wimbledon, National Basketball Association, and Major League Baseball are some of the other popular sporting events.
Many games have been played in India since ancient times and the country's national sport hockey is considered. In particular, children are more fond of playing. They play in the surrounding area, in parks, or in gardens, or they usually participate in schools. Many sports activities are organized for the maximum participation of the children and youth of the country at the school level, at the district level, at the state level, at the national level and at the international level. However, at times nationally and internationally, such as the unsavory performance of the players in the Olympic or Commonwealth Games, shows the lack and lack of good sports facilities for the players in India.

Even though Indian athletes have not been able to achieve the standard status in international level sports, it seems that they will be able to do this in the coming days as the field of sports has increased in the current years. It is being promoted at a large level in the schools and colleges by the government of the country. Indian athletes (sportspersons) are showing their full participation in every national and international level sport and are constantly trying to achieve quality and standard. Indian players had won very little gold medals in previous Olympic Games, although they had played with great courage and enthusiasm. India is leading in many sports, hockey, wrestling, cricket, etc.

The best player is selected from the students who play very well at the school level and the state level. Now the situation of sports has changed in India and it has become a good area for popularity and success. It is not different from education and it is also not necessary that if a good game is played, then education is not required for it or if someone is good at reading, then the game can not be included. This means that any person can participate in sports, whether educated or uneducated Education and sports have two facets of the same coin, namely success. It has been compulsory for students to play games in school, teachers and parents should motivate them to play games to develop their level of growth and growth at the level of their country.

Games feed our lives in many ways. These teach us to do discipline and continuous work and practice to achieve our goal. It keeps us healthy both physically and mentally and thus fits in social, emotional, mental and intellectual way. In such a situation, in a polluted and pressurized environment, where everyone is ready to tense and create problems for each other, it is the best way to concentrate on recreation and mind. It increases concentration level and memory power and fills the brain with positive thoughts.
Sport includes all forms of competitive physical activity or games which,[1] through casual or organized participation, at least in part aim to use, maintain or improve physical ability and skills while providing enjoyment to participants, and in some cases, entertainment for spectators.[2] Sports can bring positive results to one's physical health. Hundreds of sports exist, from those between single contestants, through to those with hundreds of simultaneous participants, either in teams or competing as individuals. In certain sports such as racing, many contestants may compete, simultaneously or consecutively, with one winner; in others, the contest (a match) is between two sides, each attempting to exceed the other. Some sports allow a "tie" or "draw", in which there is no single winner; others provide tie-breaking methods to ensure one winner and one loser. A number of contests may be arranged in a tournament producing a champion. Many sports leagues make an annual champion by arranging games in a regular sports season, followed in some cases by playoffs.

Sport is generally recognised as system of activities which are based in physical athleticism or physical dexterity, with the largest major competitions such as the Olympic Games admitting only sports meeting this definition,[3] and other organisations such as the Council of Europe using definitions precluding activities without a physical element from classification as sports.[2] However, a number of competitive, but non-physical, activities claim recognition as mind sports. The International Olympic Committee (through ARISF) recognises both chess and bridge as bona fide sports, and SportAccord, the international sports federation association, recognises five non-physical sports: bridge, chess, draughts (checkers), Go and xiangqi,[4][5] and limits the number of mind games which can be admitted as sports.[1]

Sport is usually governed by a set of rules or customs, which serve to ensure fair competition, and allow consistent adjudication of the winner. Winning can be determined by physical events such as scoring goals or crossing a line first. It can also be determined by judges who are scoring elements of the sporting performance, including objective or subjective measures such as technical performance or artistic impression.
There are opposing views on the necessity of competition as a defining element of a sport, with almost all professional sports involving competition, and governing bodies requiring competition as a prerequisite of recognition by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) or SportAccord.[1]

Other bodies advocate widening the definition of sport to include all physical activity. For instance, the Council of Europe include all forms of physical exercise, including those competed just for fun.

In order to widen participation, and reduce the impact of losing on less able participants, there has been an introduction of non-competitive physical activity to traditionally competitive events such as school sports days, although moves like this are often controversial.[13][14]

In competitive events, participants are graded or classified based on their "result" and often divided into groups of comparable performance, (e.g. gender, weight and age). The measurement of the result may be objective or subjective, and corrected with "handicaps" or penalties. In a race, for example, the time to complete the course is an objective measurement. In gymnastics or diving the result is decided by a panel of judges, and therefore subjective. There are many shades of judging between boxing and mixed martial arts, where victory is assigned by judges if neither competitor has lost at the end of the match time.
Sportsmanship is an attitude that strives for fair play, courtesy toward teammates and opponents, ethical behaviour and integrity, and grace in victory or defeat.[20][21][22]

Sportsmanship expresses an aspiration or ethos that the activity will be enjoyed for its own sake. The well-known sentiment by sports journalist Grantland Rice, that it's "not that you won or lost but how you played the game", and the modern Olympic creed expressed by its founder Pierre de Coubertin: "The most important thing... is not winning but taking part" are typical expressions of this sentiment.
Sport can be undertaken on an amateur, professional or semi-professional basis, depending on whether participants are incentivised for participation (usually through payment of a wage or salary). Amateur participation in sport at lower levels is often called "grassroots sport".[2][30]

The popularity of spectator sport as a recreation for non-participants has led to sport becoming a major business in its own right, and this has incentivised a high paying professional sport culture, where high performing participants are rewarded with pay far in excess of average wages, which can run into millions of dollars.[31]

Some sports, or individual competitions within a sport, retain a policy of allowing only amateur sport. The Olympic Games started with a principle of amateur competition with those who practised a sport professionally considered to have an unfair advantage over those who practised it merely as a hobby.[32] From 1971, Olympic athletes were allowed to receive compensation and sponsorship,[33] and from 1986, the IOC decided to make all professional athletes eligible for the Olympics,[33][34] with the exceptions of boxing,[35][36] and wrestling.[37][38]
Research suggests that sports have the capacity to connect youth to positive adult role models and provide positive development opportunities, as well as promote the learning and application of life skills.[58][59] In recent years the use of sport to reduce crime, as well as to prevent violent extremism and radicalization, has become more widespread, especially as a tool to improve self-esteem, enhance social bonds and provide participants with a feeling of purpose.[59]

There is no high-quality evidence that shows the effectiveness of interventions to increase sports participation of the community in sports such as mass media campaigns, educational sessions, and policy changes.[60] There is also no high-quality studies that investigate the effect of such interventions in promoting healthy behavior change in the community.[61]
The precise definition of what separates a sport from other leisure activities varies between sources. The closest to an international agreement on a definition is provided by SportAccord, which is the association for all the largest international sports federations (including association football, athletics, cycling, tennis, equestrian sports, and more), and is therefore the de facto representative of international sport.

SportAccord uses the following criteria, determining that a sport should:[1]

have an element of competition
be in no way harmful to any living creature
not rely on equipment provided by a single supplier (excluding proprietary games such as arena football)
not rely on any "luck" element specifically designed into the sport.
They also recognise that sport can be primarily physical (such as rugby or athletics), primarily mind (such as chess or Go), predominantly motorised (such as Formula 1 or powerboating), primarily co-ordination (such as billiard sports), or primarily animal-supported (such as equestrian sport).[1]

The inclusion of mind sports within sport definitions has not been universally accepted, leading to legal challenges from governing bodies in regards to being denied funding available to sports.[11] Whilst SportAccord recognises a small number of mind sports, it is not open to admitting any further mind sports.

There has been an increase in the application of the term "sport" to a wider set of non-physical challenges such as video games, also called esports (from "electronic sports"), especially due to the large scale of participation and organised competition, but these are not widely recognised by mainstream sports organisations. According to Council of Europe, European Sports Charter, article 2.i, "'Sport' means all forms of physical activity which, through casual or organised participation, aim at expressing or improving physical fitness and mental well-being, forming social relationships or obtaining results in competition at all levels."[12]